

========== PAGE 1 ==========

September 14, 2024  •  Copenhagen
Stack’s Bowers Galleries
           THE
L. E. BRUUN
             COLLECTION
A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Part I


========== PAGE 2 ==========



========== PAGE 3 ==========

September 14, 2024 
2:00 PM CEST / 5:00 AM PT
Odd Fellow Palace  
Bredgade 28, 1260 København K, Denmark
www.StacksBowers.com
Copyright © 2024 Stack’s-Bowers Numismatics, LLC • All Rights Reserved
California Office
1550 Scenic Avenue 
Suite 150
Costa Mesa, CA 92626
Tel: 800.458.4646
Tel: 949.253.0916
Fax: 949.253.4091
New Y ork Office
470 Park Avenue
New Y ork, NY 10022
Tel: 800.566.2580
Tel: 212.582.2580
Fax: 212.245.5018
Boston Office
84 State Street  
(At 22 Merchants Row)
Boston, MA 02109
Tel: 855.617.2646
Tel: 617.843.8343
Philadelphia Office
1735 Market Street
(18th & JFK Boulevard)
Philadelphia, PA 19103
Tel: 866.840.1913
Tel: 267.609.1804
Hong Kong Office
Unit 2202-03, 22/F
Mira Place Tower A
No. 132 Nathan Road
Tsim Sha Tsui 
Kowloon, HK
Tel: +011.852.2117.1191
New Hampshire Office
Tel: 603.569.0823
Oklahoma Office
Tel: 800.817.2646
Sacramento Office
Tel: 916.701.5132 
Virginia Office
Tel: 757.919.1240
Copenhagen Office
Tel: +011.45.88749409
CVR 44830485
Paris Office
Tel: +011.33.6.14.32.3177
Vancouver Office
Tel: +1.778.403.6677
A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Part I
           THE
L. E. BRUUN
             COLLECTION

========== PAGE 4 ==========

Page ii
How to Bid
Internet Absentee or Proxy Bidding
Place absentee bids now at www.StacksBowers.com or use our iOS or Android apps on your mobile device or 
tablet. Proxy bidding is enabled at midnight the day before the auction session starts live and is located on the 
lot description page. Visit our Frequently Asked Questions page at www.StacksBowers.com/FAQ/OnlineBid-
ding.aspx for more information. 
Stack’s Bowers Galleries iBid Live
Bid live anywhere in the world, on your computer at www.StacksBowers.com or use our iOS or Android apps 
on your mobile device or tablet.
Live Telephone Bidding
Phone Bidding must be arranged at least 24 hours before your session begins. Stack’s Bowers Galleries will ask 
for the lot numbers of interest and will call you during the auction so you can place bids with our representa-
tive in real time. Phone bidding is only offered for lots estimated at €2,500 or more. If you wish to arrange live 
bidding by phone, contact our Client Services Department at 800.458.4646 or 949.253.0916 or email info@
StacksBowers.com. 
Email and Mail Bidding
Use the enclosed bid sheet and email or mail it to us. Email bids to info@StacksBowers.com . If sending by 
mail, please allow sufficient time for the postal service. Please call to confirm that your bids have been re-
ceived by Stack’s Bowers Galleries.
Mail: A ttn. Client Services Department  Em ail: info@StacksBowers.com
 S tack’s Bowers Galleries
 1550 S cenic Avenue, Suite 150
 C osta Mesa, CA 92626  
 U nited States
Live Bidding
Contact our Client Services department at 800.458.4646 or 949.253.0916 to pre-register for live bidding. 
Payment Information
Please send all check, money order or cashier’s check payments to:
Stack’s Bowers Galleries
1550 Scenic Avenue, Suite 150
Costa Mesa, CA 92626
United States
For bank wire instructions, contact our Client Services Department at 800.458.4646 or 949.253.0916.  
Always call to verbally confirm wire information to prevent fraud.

========== PAGE 5 ==========

 P age iii
Auction Location
Odd Fellow Palace
Bredgade 28
1260 København K, Denmark
Contact our Client Services department 
at +45 80 40 49 42 (Copenhagen) or  
800.458.4646 / 949.253.0916 (United States) 
to pre-register for live bidding.
Auction Details
The L.  E. B ruun Collection
A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Part I
Saturday, September 14, 2024 
2:00 PM CEST / 5:00 AM PT 
Lots 1001-1286 
There will be no lot pickup on Sunday, September 15. 
Dates, times and locations are subject to change. For this auction, we have chosen to present the 
lots in the same order the coins were cataloged in 
the 1928 L. E. Bruuns mønt- og medaillesamling, 
resulting in some items appearing to be out of 
modern numismatic order.
Lot Pickup
Lot Pickup will be conducted at  
Odd Fellow Palace, Denmark: 
September 16-17, 2024 (by appointment only)
THE L. E. BRUUN CO LLECTION
A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Part I
Lot Viewing
New Y ork City offices  
470 Park Avenue, New Y ork, NY 10022 
July 29-31, 2024 • 9:00 AM-5:00 PM ET (by appointment only)
ANA World’s Fair of Money®
The Donald E. Stephens Convention Center • Room 1 • 5555 N. River Road, Rosemont, IL 60018 
August 4, 2024 • 12:00-5:00 PM CT (no appointment needed)
August 5-9, 2024 • 9:00 AM-5:00 PM CT (no appointment needed)
Hong Kong SAR offices  
Unit 2202-03, 22/F , Mira Place Tower A, No. 132 Nathan Road, Tsim Sha Tsui Kowloon, HK 
August 26-28, 2024 • 9:00 AM-6:00 PM HKT (by appointment only)
Odd Fellow Palace • Bredgade 28, 1260 København K, Denmark 
September 11, 2024 • 1:00 PM-5:00 PM CEST (no appointment needed) 
September 12-13, 2024 • 10:00 AM-5:00 PM CEST (no appointment needed) 
September 14, 2024 • 10:00 AM-2:00 PM CEST (no appointment needed)
If you cannot view in person, we will have our professional numismatists on hand to answer questions via 
phone or email about specific lots. Please email info@StacksBowers.com to make arrangements.
View all lots and bid online 
at StacksBowers.com
Order of Sale
Category                  L ot Numbers 
Coinage of Denmark ..............1001-1172
Coinage of Norway .................1173-1240
Coinage of Sweden .................1241-1286
Cataloged by: Michael Fornitz, Henrik Berndt, and Nicholas Fritz.
Imaging by: Chrissie Good, Carol Nguyen, and Azwar Rashid.

========== PAGE 6 ==========

Page iv
Important Information About Bidding, 
Credit and Accepted Forms of Payment 
Below is a summary only. Please review the complete Terms and Conditions of Sale, beginning on page 362 
or visit www.StacksBowers.com.
Stack’s Bowers Galleries iBid Live
Bid live anywhere in the world, on your computer at www.StacksBowers.com or use our iOS or Android apps 
on your mobile device or tablet.
Buyer’s Premium and Value Added Tax (V AT)
• For Buyers who take delivery of lots in non-EU countries, a premium of twenty percent (20%) based 
upon the total amount of the hammer (minimum of €25), will be added to all purchases of individual 
lots (the “Buyer’s Premium”). Danish V AT will not apply, provided that the lots in question are exported 
outside of the EU within 30 days from the date of the Auction Sale.
• Buyers which are non-V AT registered entities or individuals who take delivery of lots within EU 
countries subject to margin scheme taxation (in Danish “brugtmoms”) will be invoiced a V AT charge 
and a Buyer’s Premium for a total of twenty five percent (25%) based upon the total amount of the ham-
mer (minimum of €25), which will be added to all purchases of individual lots. For Buyers who take 
delivery of lots within EU countries which are either V AT-exempt or subject to regular V AT, a Buyer’s 
Premium of twenty percent (20%) based upon the total amount of the hammer (minimum of €25), will 
be added (excluding Danish V AT on the hammer plus Buyer’s Premium). 
• Institutional EU Buyers with a valid V AT number registered in an EU member state (other than Den-
mark) will be charged a Buyer’s Premium, but may be exempt from Danish V AT if said EU Buyer pro-
vides the requisite statutory registration documents and can provide documentation that the lot has been 
transported to the foreign address (i.e. outside Denmark) provided by the EU Buyer to the Auctioneer. 
These documents comprise the V AT registration number and the acknowledgement of receipt from the 
territory of the EU member state in which the V AT registration was issued. Should the Auctioneer effect 
the export of any lots, and provided a valid V AT registration document was submitted to the Auctioneer 
before purchase, V AT will not be charged.
Summary of Buyer’s Premium and Value Added Tax (V AT)
*For lots sold under the margin scheme*
Non-Taxable or 
Taxable Persons
Non-Taxable 
Persons
Taxable 
Persons
Non-Taxable or 
Taxable Persons
Buyer’s 
Premium 
a n d  VAT
 
25%
 
25%
 
20%
 
20%
Lots 
Delivered To
Denmark EU,  
Not Denmark
EU,  
Not Denmark
Non-EU

========== PAGE 7 ==========

 Pa ge v
Taxable persons are registered for V AT and acquire coins with reference to this registration, e.g. resellers.
Non-taxable persons do not acquire coins with reference to a V AT registration, e.g. collectors.
Lots subject to regular V AT will be marked on the website and in the catalog with the symbol “u” or with the 
text “This item is subject to full V AT” .
Lots which are not subject to V AT will be marked on the website and in the catalog with the symbol “s” or 
with the text “This item is V AT free” .
Placing Bids 
• All bids must be made in Euros. 
• All invoices will be made in Euros.
Bid Limits 
• Bidders without pre-approval by Stack’s Bowers Galleries that plan to bid in excess of their bid limit must 
contact Stack’s Bowers Galleries in advance. A 25% deposit will be required at least 48 hours before the 
start of the auction paid by cashier’s check or money order, approved check, wire transfer or other im-
mediate bank transfer. Any unused deposit will be promptly returned to the bidder. 
Accepted Forms of Payment 
• We welcome payment by cashier’s check or money order, approved check, wire transfer or other immedi-
ate bank transfer in Euros and U.S. Dollars.   
• Cash payments ARE NOT accepted. 
• Payment via credit card or PayPal will not be accepted without prior approval of Stack’s Bowers Galleries. 
All payments by credit card or PayPal will incur a surcharge of 2.5%. 
• All invoices will be made in Euros.  If paying in U.S. Dollars, Stack’s Bowers Galleries will credit your  
invoice at the rate established by Stack’s Bowers Galleries after any fees or charges.
Shipping
• All lots will be shipped from Denmark.  Any import (and/or turnover) tax and duty payable abroad is on 
Buyer’s account in every case.
Questions? 
• If you have any questions about bidding, credit or payments, please contact us at 
949.253.0916  /  +45 88 74 94 09 or e-mail infoDK@StacksBowers.com. 

========== PAGE 8 ==========

Page vi
The Stack’s Bowers Galleries Team
Christine Karstedt 
Executive Vice President 
CKarstedt@StacksBowers.com
Jason Carter 
Executive Vice President 
Jason@StacksBowers.com
Andrew Glassman 
Chief Financial Officer 
AGlassman@StacksBowers.com
California Office
Jeff Ambio 
Vice President 
of Numismatics 
JAmbio@StacksBowers.com
Richard Ponterio 
Executive Vice President 
RPonterio@StacksBowers.com
Matt Orsini 
Director of World &  
Ancient Numismatics 
MOrsini@StacksBowers.com
John Pack 
Executive Director 
of Consignments 
JPack@StacksBowers.com
Steve Price 
Director of Numismatic 
Business Development 
SPrice@StacksBowers.com
Wayne Berkley 
Vice President  
of Client Services 
WBerkley@StacksBowers.com
Peter A. Treglia 
Vice President 
PTreglia@StacksBowers.com
Aris Maragoudakis 
Director of 
World Paper Money 
Aris@StacksBowers.com 
Ben Orooji
Director of  
U.S. Coin Auctions
BOrooji@StacksBowers.com
Kyle Ponterio 
Senior Numismatist,  
Consignment Director 
KyPonterio@StacksBowers.com
Chris Ortega 
Numismatist, 
Lead Auctioneer 
COrtega@StacksBowers.com
Ron Gillio 
Numismatic Acquisitions 
Coordinator 
RGillio@StacksBowers.com
Q. David Bowers 
Stack’s Bowers Galleries 
Founder 
QBowers@StacksBowers.com
Greg Roberts 
CEO 
GRoberts@StacksBowers.com
Brian Kendrella 
President 
BKendrella@StacksBowers.com
Lawrence R. Stack 
Stack’s Bowers Galleries 
Founder 
LStack@StacksBowers.com
Maryna Synytsya 
Manager of European 
Operations 
MSynytsya@StacksBowers.com
Henrik Berndt 
Senior Numismatist 
HBerndt@StacksBowers.com
Henrik Holt Christensen 
Senior Consignment  
Director of Europe 
Holt@StacksBowers.com
European Offices
Peter Bjørnstrup 
Senior Numismatist 
PBjornstrup@StacksBowers.com
Michael Fornitz 
Director of Stack’s Bowers  
Galleries Denmark 
MFornitz@StacksBowers.com

========== PAGE 9 ==========

 P age vii
East Coast Offices
Greg Cohen 
Senior Numismatist 
GCohen@StacksBowers.com
James McCartney 
Director of Consignments  
and Numismatics 
JMcCartney@StacksBowers.com
Vicken Y egparian 
Vice President 
of Numismatics 
VY egparian@StacksBowers.com
Mark Schimel 
East Coast Retail Director 
MSchimel@StacksBowers.com 
Bobby Avena 
Head Numismatic Trader 
BAvena@StacksBowers.com
Andrew Bowers 
East Coast Sales Manager 
ABowers@StacksBowers.com
Asian Offices
Contact Us for  
More Information
Legendary Collections  |  Legendary Results  |  A Legendary Auction Firm
Client Services: 
Copenhagen: +45 80 40 49 42
California: 800.458.4646
New Y ork: 800.566.2580 
InfoDK@StacksBowers.com
Info@StacksBowers.com
 InfoHK@StacksBowers.com
Zhou Shou Yuan 
Numismatic and Information 
Technology Consultant, China 
ZShouyuan@StacksBowers.com
Additional Expertise
Devin Hipp 
Vice President 
DHipp@StacksBowers.com
Jeremy Bostwick 
Senior Numismatist  
and Cataloger 
JBostwick@StacksBowers.com
Dennis Hengeveld 
Director of Consignments 
Senior Numismatist 
Dennis@StacksBowers.com
John Kraljevich 
Director of  
Numismatic Americana 
JK@StacksBowers.com
Christopher Maisano 
Numismatist 
CMaisano@StacksBowers.com
Michael Moczalla 
Currency Specialist 
MMoczalla@StacksBowers.com
Mark Curcio 
Philadelphia  
Store Manager 
MCurcio@StacksBowers.com
Julie Abrams 
Consignment Director 
and Dealer Liaison 
JAbrams@StacksBowers.com
Adem Karisik 
Buyer and  
Consignment Director 
AKarisik@StacksBowers.com
Nirat Lertchitvikul 
  Executive Director 
Asian Operations 
Nirat@StacksBowers.com
Kelvin Cheung 
Director, Asia 
KCheung@StacksBowers.com
Ping Lertchitvikul 
Director, Asia 
Ping@StacksBowers.com 
Crystal Ng 
Manager, Asia 
CNg@StacksBowers.com
Frederick Y ow 
Consignment Director 
Southeast Asia 
FredY ow@StacksBowers.com 
Christine Pun 
Senior Auction Executive 
CPun@StacksBowers.com 
Stanley Chu 
Boston Store Manager 
SChu@StacksBowers.com
California Office
949.253.0916
New Y ork Office
212.582.2580
Boston Office 
617.843.8343
New Hampshire Office 
603.569.0823
Oklahoma Office  
800.817.2646 
Philadelphia Office  
267.609.1804
Sacramento Office  
916.701.5132
Virginia Office  
757.919.1240
Hong Kong Office
+011.852.2117.1191
Copenhagen Office 
+ 011.45.88749409
Paris 
+011.33.6.14.32.3177
Vancouver Office 
+1.778.403.6677

========== PAGE 10 ==========

Page viii
Welcome to the L. E. Bruun Collection:
A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Part I
“Once in a lifetime opportunity. ” This is a cliché we hear often in numismatics 
as coins and notes that have been off the market for decades suddenly spring 
onto the marketplace. 
But how many collections can be said to represent a once in multiple lifetimes 
opportunity? Precious few, I would guess. The L. E. Bruun Collection is without a doubt one of those 
collections. Not only have these coins been off the collector market for the entirety of the century 
since Bruun’s passing on November 21, 1923, but a great number of them had been off the market 
for decades, or even a century or more, before then. As an example, Bruun’s acquisition of the Bille-
Brahe Collection in 1922 brought into the Bruun cabinet countless stunning coins that had been 
acquired by the Bille-Brahe clan as far back as circa 1800, the inception of this multi-generational 
family collection.
The acquisition of coins from this catalog, or from one of the upcoming Stack’s Bowers Galleries 
auctions of the L. E. Bruun Collection over the coming years, will represent major achievements 
for connoisseurs and neophytes alike. Since we announced the sale of the Bruun Collection, I have 
heard countless stories of collectors waiting their entire lifetime for a crack at some of Bruun’s coins. 
The story of our very own Michael Fornitz, the “grand old man” of Danish professional numismatics 
(an affectionate nickname given to him by the late Jerry Meyer, much-loved numismatist and former 
keeper of the Danish crown jewels), is front and center in my mind. His falling in love with the idea 
of the Bruun Collection as a boy is echoed by the passion I have seen and felt from so many of our 
clients and numismatic staff. 
Stack’s Bowers Galleries aims to bring that passion to our sales of the Bruun Collection, a passion 
that we have been cultivating since Joseph B. and Morton Stack first opened their midtown New 
Y ork doors to collectors in the 1930s. Over time, the Stack Family, along with Q. David Bowers, 
built up their numismatic relationships with the collector in mind, significantly contributing to the 
longevity of the numismatic hobby. For Stack’s Bowers Galleries, the collector and the numismatic 
discipline itself are just as important as the bottom line, a credo we will apply to how we approach 
and market the Bruun Collection. 
When I first heard about the Bruun Collection from Henrik Christensen, a native of Denmark and 
our Senior Consignment Director of Europe, I recognized that the re-entry of the Bruun coins into 
the marketplace after a century in storage would be a boon to collectors. I also recognized the op -
portunities it would present for the growth of Stack’s Bowers Galleries—not only in terms of the tens 
of millions of additional dollars of auction prices realized it would bring in for the firm, but also for 
the expansion of our already diverse client base and growing global presence. 
I knew that I needed to assemble the right team to land this historic and complex collection. For the 
last nearly three years, Matt Orsini (Director of World & Ancient Numismatics), Vicken Y egparian 
(Vice President of Numismatics), Henrik, and I interfaced with Bruun Collection representatives, 
strategized about the collection, and crafted proposals to bring that strategy to life. In June of 2023, 
the numismatists on this team surveyed the collection’s 20,000 treasures on the ground in Denmark. 
Needless to say, I wasn’t surprised when they returned starry-eyed from what they had seen: the 
best, most diverse, highest quality, and most valuable private collection of Scandinavian coinage—  
and in fact most valuable international coin collection—ever to come to market. With over a century 
of numismatic experience among the three of them, it takes a lot to impress them, but impressed 
they were! 


========== PAGE 11 ==========

 P age ix
L. E. Bruun’s stately mansion at Havnegade 29 in Copenhagen in a ca. 1910 photograph.
Over the years, our refined group of numismatic experts has been referred 
to as a “dream team, ” with world-famous historian and numismatist Q. Da-
vid Bowers long at the top of the roster. I knew that if Stack’s Bowers Gal-
leries landed the Bruun Collection, I would have to further build up our 
current “dream team” with the goal of bringing the L. E. Bruun Collection 
under the Stack’s Bowers Galleries umbrella of internationally famous col-
lections we have sold: the Harry Bass, Virgil Brand, Louis E. Eliasberg, Sr., 
John J. Ford, Jr., Garrett family, Norweb family, D. Brent Pogue, and Mark & 
Lottie Salton collections, to name a few. 
I would need to expand our “dream team” to include the best numismatists 
Denmark had to offer. As we pursued the Bruun Collection over the last 
couple of years, a few names came up over and over again: Michael Fornitz, 
Henrik Berndt, and Peter Bjørnstrup, all prominent Danish professional numismatists with exten-
sive experience in the auction industry. With the Bruun Collection solidly in our hands, I reached 
out to this “dream team” of Danish experts, who jumped at the opportunity to be a part of the most 
significant private collection in Scandinavia and, in fact, one of the most significant in the world. 
Their expertise brings the coins in this catalog to life. 
Supported by the tireless efforts of our entire global team, I am immensely proud to present this first 
tranche of the L. E. Bruun Collection: A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History. I very much 
look forward to kicking off the auctions of the Bruun Collection on September 14 at the Odd Fellow 
Palace in Copenhagen, a short walk from his grand home along the water at Havnegade 29, where 
he kept and enjoyed his collection for many years. If you plan to attend the auction in person, please 
be sure to introduce yourself to me and the entire “dream team” of Stack’s Bowers Galleries. 
Brian Kendrella
President, Stack’s Bowers Galleries

========== PAGE 12 ==========

Page x
Velkommen til “L. E. Bruuns samling: 
Et korpus over skandinavisk mønthistorie. 
Del I”.
En “once in a lifetime” mulighed. Dette er en kliché, vi ofte hører i numis-
matikken, når mønter og sedler, der ikke har været udbudt i årtier, pludselig 
dukker op på markedet. 
Jeg gætter dog på, at kun uhyre få samlinger er så enestående, at der må ikke 
blot en, men flere generationer til inden muligheden måske opstår?
At L. E. Bruuns samling udgør en af disse samlinger er imidlertid hævet over enhver tvivl, for ikke 
alene har disse mønter været borte fra samlermarkedet i et helt århundrede siden Bruuns død d. 21. 
november 1923, men mange af dem havde allerede på dette tidspunkt ikke været til salg i årtier eller 
måske endda et århundrede. Som eksempel kan nævnes, at ved Bruuns køb af Bille-Brahesamlingen 
i 1922 tilførtes samlingen utallige fantastiske mønter, som var blevet erhvervet af Bille-Brahefamilien 
så langt tilbage som omkring år 1800, hvor denne familiesamling påbegyndtes. 
For både erfarne kendere og nybegyndere vil muligheden for at erhverve en eller flere mønter fra 
dette katalog, eller fra en af de kommende års Stack’s Bowers Galleries auktioner over L. E. Bruuns 
samling, stå som noget ganske særligt. Siden vi annoncerede salget af Bruuns samling, har jeg hørt 
adskillige historier om samlere, der igennem hele deres samlerliv har håbet på at kunne erhverve 
nogle af Bruuns mønter. Historien om vores egen Michael Fornitz, dansk professionel numismatiks 
“grand old man” (et kærligt kælenavn givet til ham af den populære numismatiker og vogter over de 
danske kronjuveler, Jerry Meyer (1942-2011)), er et af de fineste eksempler, jeg kan komme i tanke 
om. Hans drengeforelskelse i selve ideen om Bruunsamlingen genspejles i den passion, jeg både har 
kunnet se og føle hos mange af vores kunder og numismatiske medarbejdere. 
Stack’s Bowers Galleries medbringer med stolthed den selv samme glæde og passion til vores auk-
tioner over Bruuns samling, for lige siden Joseph B. og Morton Stack midt på Manhattan i New Y ork 
for første gang åbnede dørene for samlerne i 1930’ erne, har vi selv delt denne passion for numisma-
tikken. Igennem tiden udbyggede Stackfamilien sammen med Q. David Bowers deres numismatiske 
netværk med samleren i centrum og bidrog til at styrke den numismatiske hobbys udvikling og 
livskraft. For Stack’s Bowers Galleries er samleren og numismatikken i sig selv lige så vigtig som bun-
dlinjen, et credo, der ligger os meget på sinde i forhold til, hvordan vi arbejder med og markedsfører 
salget af L.E. Bruuns samling. 
Da jeg første gang hørte om Bruunsamlingen fra Henrik Holt Christensen, der er født i Danmark og 
vores “Senior Consignment Director of Europe” , blev jeg klar over, at Bruunmønternes “genopstan-
delse” i møntmarkedet efter deres århundredelange Tornerosesøvn ville være noget ganske særligt 
for samlerne. Jeg indså også de muligheder, det ville give for vækst af Stack’s Bowers Galleries - ikke 
kun i form af titusindvis af millioner af ekstra dollars i realiserede hammerslag for firmaet, men også 
ved at udvide vores omfattende kundebase og styrke vores allerede voksende globale tilstedeværelse. 
Jeg blev klar over, at jeg var nødt til at samle det rigtige hold for at opnå en aftale om salg af denne 
historiske og ekstraordinære samling. I de sidste næsten tre år har Matt Orsini (“Director of World 
& Ancient Numismatics”), Vicken Y egparian (“Vice President of Numismatics”), Henrik og jeg haft 
løbende kontakt med repræsentanter fra Bruunsamlingen, lagt strategier for salget og udarbejdet 
forslag til, hvorledes denne strategi kunne føres ud i livet. I juni 2023 drog holdets numismatikere til 
Danmark for at studere samlingens omkring 20.000 skatte. Det er overflødigt at sige, at jeg ikke var 
overrasket, da de vendte tilbage med julelys i øjnene over det, de havde set: Den bedste, mest for -
skelligartede, smukkest bevarede og mest værdifulde private samling af skandinaviske mønter – ja, 
faktisk den mest værdifulde internationale møntsamling – der nogensinde havde været på marke-
det. Med i alt over et århundredes numismatisk erfaring, skulle der meget til at imponere dem, men 
imponerede var de! 


========== PAGE 13 ==========

 P age xi
L. E. Bruuns fornemme københavnerhjem i Havnegade 29 fotograferet ca. 1910.
Gennem årene er vores udsøgte gruppe af numismatiske eksperter anført af 
den verdensberømte historiske skribent og numismatiker, Q. David Bow-
ers blevet omtalt som et “drømmehold” . Jeg indså derfor også, at såfremt 
det lykkedes for Stack’s Bowers Galleries at få Bruuns samling indleveret, 
ville jeg være nødt til at udbygge vores nuværende “dream team” yderligere 
med det mål at tilføje L. E. Bruuns navn til det panteon af vidt berømte 
samlere, hvis samlinger allerede var blevet solgt af Stack’s Bowers Galleries. 
Jeg nævner i flæng: Harry Bass, Virgil Brand, Louis E. Eliasberg, Sr., John 
J. Ford, Jr., Garrett-familien, Norweb-familien, D. Brent Pogue og Mark & 
Lottie Salton Collections.
Jeg måtte simpelthen udvide vores “dream team” til at omfatte de bedste nu-
mismatikere, Danmark havde at byde på. I løbet af de par år, hvor vi havde 
beskæftiget os med Bruunsamlingen, blev et par navne ved med at dukke op: Michael Fornitz, Hen-
rik Berndt og Peter Bjørnstrup, alle fremtrædende danske professionelle numismatikere med stor 
erfaring i auktionsbranchen. I samme øjeblik jeg fik samlingen betroet, rakte jeg ud til dette “dream 
team” af danske eksperter, der, ved udsigten til at blive en del af historien om den mest betydnings-
fulde private samling i Skandinavien og en af de mest betydningsfulde i verdenen, alle straks slog til. 
Deres ekspertise bringer mønterne i dette katalog til live. 
Godt hjulpet af en utrættelig indsats fra hele vores globale team, er jeg utrolig stolt over at kunne 
præsentere denne første del af: “L. E. Bruuns samling: Et korpus over skandinavisk mønthistorie” . Jeg 
glæder mig meget til at begynde auktionerne over Bruunsamlingen d. 14. september i Odd Fellow 
Palæet i Bruuns hjemby København, en kort gåtur fra hans fornemme hjem ved vandet i Havnegade 
29, hvor han opbevarede og nød sin samling i mange år. Hvis du har mulighed for at deltage i auk-
tionen personligt, så vil det glæde både mig og hele “drømmeholdet” i  Stack’s Bowers Galleries at 
hilse på dig. 
Brian Kendrella
President, Stack’s Bowers Galleries

========== PAGE 14 ==========

Page xii
Preface
My first word to the readers of this preface has to be: “Congratulations”! Con-
gratulations on being among the select group who just happen to be alive at a 
time that allows them to participate in the sale of Lars Emil Bruun’s collection 
of Scandinavian coins. 
I remember when, as a 14-year-old in the mid-1970s, I visited the founding 
IAPN member Johan Christian Holm’s cozy shop in the center of old Copen-
hagen. Here I was, for the first time, introduced to the then almost 50-year-
old catalog of Bruun’s collection. With a mixture of awe and excitement, I bought the catalog, and as 
soon as I got home, I threw myself at the introduction, which stated that the collection would be re-
leased for sale at auction on November 21, 2023, which date incidentally (or maybe not?) happened 
to be my birthday. Some quick arithmetic combined with a sober calculation of probability, made it 
seemed likely that my chances of still being alive on that date were quite good, and I have kept my 
fingers crossed ever since. 
Although no person alive has cataloged as many and as valuable Danish coins as I have over my long 
career as a professional numismatist (or perhaps precisely because of this), I can confidently say, that 
apart from the royal collection in the Danish National Museum, and regardless of which parameter 
you use, be it value, condition, rarity or numismatic and historical significance, there has never 
existed a collection of Danish and Danish/Norwegian coins as exceptional as that of L. E. Bruun. I 
therefore didn’t need much time for reflection when I was contacted by Stack’s Bowers Galleries ask-
ing if I would be interested in being the head of cataloging of L. E. Bruun’s collection as a director of 
Stack’s Bowers Galleries in a new office in Copenhagen. 
The present catalog – Part I – presents a string of highlights of Scandinavian coins, starting with the 
birth certificate of “modern” Danish numismatics, and one of my personal favorites: the gold Noble 
by King Hans minted in 1496. But it makes little sense to highlight the individual pieces in a preface 
such as this. As this inaugural sale offers only almost priceless treasures, it is evident that not all col-
lectors should get their hopes up to acquire a piece from this auction. However, there is no reason to 
despair, because L. E. Bruun was, in the best sense of the word, a classic numismatist for whom noth-
ing was too big, nothing too small, and absolutely nothing uninteresting. For those with a historical 
interest but perhaps not the deepest pockets, I take particular pleasure in relating that in the coming 
years Stack’s Bowers Galleries will be offering around 20,000 different Scandinavian coins from the 
Viking Age to the early 20th century. Although they are all fine, carefully selected and interesting 
pieces, some are bound to sell for prices low enough that even a 14-year-old’s pocket money would 
allow acquisition of a coin, medal or banknote from this fabled collection. 
However, whether you collect Danish Portugalosers or Norwegian quadruple Talers (and who 
doesn’t?), this is the auction not to be missed. Several of the pieces are so rare that they have not 
been offered for sale in the last hundred years or more; the cliché that this is a “once in a lifetime” op-
portunity is in this case simply an understatement. The condition of the individual specimens is also 
consistently so sublime that they cannot be found finer in private ownership. Keats’ famous sentence 
“ A thing of beauty is a joy forever” suddenly becomes a very concrete truth. I encourage everyone, 
regardless of whether their starting point is numismatics, historical interest or investment, to seize 
the day, knowing that such an opportunity will not even come again in 100 years. 
Michael Fornitz
Director of Stack’s Bowers Galleries Denmark


========== PAGE 15 ==========

 P age xiii
Forord
Mit første ord til læserne af dette forord skal være: “tillykke” . Tillykke med at 
høre til den lille udvalgte skare, der tilfældigvis er født på et tidspunkt, der 
giver dem mulighed for at deltage i salget af Lars Emil Bruuns samling af 
skandinaviske mønter.
Jeg husker, hvordan jeg som fjortenårig i midten af 70’ erne besøgte det stif-
tende IAPN medlem, Johan Christian Holms hyggelige butik i centrum af det 
gamle København. Her blev jeg for første gang præsenteret for det allerede da 
næsten 50 år gamle katalog over Bruuns samling. Med en blanding af ærefrygt og begejstring købte 
jeg kataloget, og straks jeg kom hjem, kastede jeg mig over indledningen, hvor det fremgik, at sam-
lingen ville blive frigivet til salg på auktion d. 21. november 2023, hvilket tilfældigvis – eller måske 
netop ikke? – er min fødselsdag. Ved hjælp af lidt hurtig hovedregning kombineret med en nøgtern 
sandsynlighedsberegning forekom det mig da sandsynligt, at mine chancer for stadig at være i live 
på dette tidspunkt burde være ganske gode, og jeg har siden da varmet mig ved disse udsigter. 
Selvom ingen nulevende person har katalogiseret så mange og så værdifulde danske mønter, som 
jeg har gjort gennem en lang karriere som professionel numismatiker – eller måske netop derfor 
– kan jeg med sindsro sige, at bortset fra den kongelige samling i det danske Nationalmuseum har 
der aldrig nogensinde eksisteret en så enestående samling af danske og dansk/norske mønter. Vel at 
mærke enestående uanset hvilket parameter, man anvender, det være sig værdi, kvalitet, raritet eller 
numismatisk og historisk betydning.
Det krævede således ingen lang betænkningstid, da jeg blev kontaktet af Stack’s Bowers Galleries 
med en forespørgsel om, hvorvidt jeg ville være interesseret i at stå i spidsen for katalogiseringen af 
L. E. Bruuns samling fra et nyt kontor i København.
Det foreliggende katalog præsenterer en perlerække af lutter highlights fra skandinavisk numis -
matik, begyndende med dåbsattesten for det moderne danske møntvæsen, kong Hans’ guldnobel 
fra 1496, og det giver liden mening at fremhæve de enkelte stykker i dette forord. Med udeluk -
kende nærmest uvurderlige skatte, er det naturligvis indlysende, at ikke alle samlere eller de med 
en historisk interesse, der er større end deres formue, kan gøre sig håb om at erhverve et stykke fra 
denne første auktion. Der er imidlertid ingen grund til at fortvivle, for L. E. Bruun var i ordets bed-
ste forstand en klassisk numismatiker for hvem, intet var for stort, intet for småt, og absolut intet 
uinteressant. Det er derfor med en særlig glæde, at jeg kan fortælle, at Stack’s Bowers Galleries i de 
kommende år vil udbyde omkring 20.000 forskellige, skandinaviske mønter fra vikingetiden til det 
tidlige 20. århundrede. Alle fine, nøje udvalgte og interessante stykker, men undertiden alligevel til 
priser, hvor selv en 14 årig vil kunne få sine lommepenge til at række til at erhverve en mønt, medalje 
eller pengeseddel fra denne sagnomspundne samling.
Hvad enten man samler danske portugaløsere eller norske, firdobbelte specier (og hvem gør ikke 
det?) er dette imidlertid auktionen, som man ikke må gå glip af. Adskillige af stykkerne er så sjældne, 
at de ikke har været udbudt til salg i de sidste hundrede år eller længere, og klicheen om, at dette er en 
mulighed, der kun opstår “once in a lifetime” er i dette tilfælde snarest en underdrivelse. Kvaliteten 
af de her præsenterede eksemplarer er tillige gennemgående så høj, at de ikke findes bedre i pri -
vateje, og Keats’ berømte sentens om, at: “ A thing of beauty is a joy forever” bliver pludselig en meget 
konkret sandhed.
Jeg kan derfor kun opfordre til, at alle uanset om deres udgangspunkt er numismatik, historisk in-
teresse eller investering, vil forstå at gribe dagen vel vidende, at den ikke engang kommer igen om 
100 år.
Michael Fornitz
Direktør for Stack’s Bowers Galleries Danmark


========== PAGE 16 ==========

Page xiv
Lars Emil Bruun (1852 – 1923 ): 
From the Local Inn to an International Enterprise
Every collection is unique – and so is every collector. If you want to truly 
understand a collection, you need to know the person who assembled 
it. This is difficult enough when it comes to collectors who are still alive. 
With people like Lars Emil Bruun, who passed away 100 years ago, it is 
almost impossible. While it is easy to gather the most important facts and 
figures, it is a real puzzle to try to understand their personality. All the lit-
tle pieces of information must be put together in the right way to paint an 
accurate picture. Each new piece has to be placed carefully and can some-
times change the picture in a surprising way.  In this article, we will try to 
put together what we know about Lars Emil Bruun. It is only possible for 
us to do this because Lars Emil Bruun’s grandson, Ioann Bruun, and the 
regional historian Flemming Weye published a monograph called Smør 
og mønter (Butter and Coins) in 2006, presenting a comprehensive study of the archival sources on 
the subject. Their work forms the basis of the following article.
A Dynas ty of Rural Innkeepers
Lars Emil Bruun was born on 29 March 1852 in the small Danish village of Havdrup Ulvemose.
His cradle stood in a mill that his father Ole Bruun had leased. Lars Emil’s father must have had an 
adventurous spirit. Although he could have comfortably continued the successful business of his an-
cestors, he chose to become a sailor at a young age. The Bruun family – the Danish equivalent of the 
English “Brown” – had run the thriving local tavern in Ordrup, a small village about 11 kilometers 
north of Copenhagen, since 1768. Their establishment was a kind of inn where guests could stay the 
night. It was also a place where farmers could buy and sell their goods. The Bruuns also owned large 
tracts of land, which Ole’s enterprising grandmother had acquired.
Ole did not want to help his father with the local inn. Instead, he obtained his boatmaster’s license 
and did not return to Ordrup until after his father’s death on 4 April 1844. It is unclear why he did 
not stay in Ordrup once he had returned. Instead, he leased the mill of Havdrup Ulvemose in a com-
pletely different corner of Denmark as early as Novem-
ber 1850. Perhaps he did not get along with the people 
in Ordrup. Or perhaps the inn did not make enough 
profit under his management – after all, Ole Bruun did 
not seem to have much of an entrepreneurial spirit. He 
also stopped running the mill at Havdrup Ulvemose in 
1857, even though he had been granted a concession to 
operate the mill.
He returned to Ordrup, where in the late 1850s there was 
increasing economic opportunity. A railroad line con-
necting Ordrup directly to Copenhagen was completed 
in 1863, allowing both goods and people to be trans -
ported quickly to the capital, in turn stimulating growth. 
This period from 1800 is now considered the golden age 
of Denmark, a time when everything seemed possible. 
But one year later it all came to an end: the 1864 Second 
Schleswig War (also known as the Prusso-Danish War) 
shattered Denmark’s dreams of becoming a superpower.
By Ursula Kampmann
Lars Emil Bruun in 1892.
Ole Bruun in August 1886 with his four  
daughters Sophie, Johanne, Annette and Emilie. 
The girl on the far right is probably his  
foster daughter Godtfrede Hemmert.

========== PAGE 17 ==========

 P age xv
The conflict was over the duchies of Holstein and Schleswig, which 
were claimed by both Denmark and the German Confederation. 
As the war wore on, it became clear that the Danish troops were no 
match for the combined Prussian and Austrian armies. Little Lars 
Emil was 12 years old at the time and, of course, far too young to 
fight. But he was old enough to make friends with the many Dan-
ish soldiers who stayed at his father’s inn. He eagerly studied the 
newspapers, which published long lists of war casualties. He fol -
lowed the fate of his new comrades closely and became an ardent 
patriot in the process. For him, Schleswig and Holstein always re-
mained Danish.
Hard Years in Holbæk
In 1866, the Danish government had to accept that Schleswig and 
Holstein were lost. This not only cost the country 40% of its pop-
ulation but also meant losing a number of important ports, the 
second university in the country, numerous industrial enterprises, 
and – particularly painful – the most agriculturally productive provinces. Lars Emil Bruun, who 
corresponded in many languages, never could bring himself to write in German, and this traumatic 
loss may be the reason why.
Denmark was to recover economically quickly. Astute politicians pushed for reforms to “gain from 
within what was lost outside. ” During this renewal, the Danish education system was also modern-
ized. However, these reforms came too late for Lars Emil Bruun. He received his patchy education 
partly in a public school, partly in private schools, and through home schooling with the local pas-
tor. On August 1, 1866, his father put him into an apprenticeship, as was customary in the bourgeois 
circles of Europe since the late Middle Ages.
Thus, the 14-year-old learned the trade of a merchant in the business of C. E. Nissen in Holbæk. 
This meant working hours from 6:00 AM to 10:00 PM in summer and from 7:00 AM to 9:00 PM in 
winter. Sunday? Theoretically, the shop was closed during mass, but the back door remained open 
because the farmers had time to do their business on Sundays. The work was hard and physically 
demanding. Y oung Lars Emil particularly hated “laying herrings, ” which meant transferring pickled 
salted herrings from the merchant’s large barrel to the smaller containers of the farmers. He later 
vividly described how the salt particularly affected his frostbitten hands in winter. During these four 
years, Lars Emil saw his parents only twice. Traveling the approximately 65 kilometers to Ordrup 
was time-consuming and costly.
No apprentice had extra money back then. He received only food, clothing, and lodging for his hard 
work. He shared a tiny room with a journeyman, where rain dripped through the ceiling.  The bed 
was too narrow, rags served as covers, but that was not the worst part. Bruun later recounted with 
horror that the housewife always bought too much meat, which then spoiled. Of course, it wasn’t 
thrown away but served to the apprentices, who were relieved if they didn’t have to eat it under the 
housewife’s watchful eye. That gave them the chance to get rid of it.
Essentially, there was only one thing that comforted Lars Emil back then: the coins with which he 
could splendidly dream away into past times and other worlds. In these tough years, Bruun’s love for 
numismatics developed. It not only provided him with relaxation but also the friendship of an artist 
who was also interested in coins, whose wife gladly mothered the apprentice. The young collector ac-
quired 49 silver and 87 copper coins during that time. Even much later, he would be proud of them.
Lars Emil Bruun in 1908.

========== PAGE 18 ==========

Page xvi
First Steps in the Business World
The apprenticeship ended on September 25, 1870. From that date, young Bruun received an annual 
salary of 200 Rigsdaler, plus room and board. Bruun stayed with Nissen for another year and a half 
before leaving with an excellent reference.
Instead of immediately seeking a new employer, the barely 20-year-old decided to make up for his 
lack of theoretical education. He enrolled as a student at Grüner’s Commercial Academy. Its founder, 
Haldur Grüner, was then considered the leading Danish economist. The sons of major merchants 
also studied at his Copenhagen institute. Lars Emil, though far superior in practical experience, had 
a rather poor basic school education. He had much to catch up on before graduating with one of the 
best exams of his year.
This earned him an excellently paid position for his age with the wholesaler P . F . Esbensen. He now 
received 1,000 Rigsdaler annually, though without room and board. This position was crucial for 
Bruun. Here, he learned everything he would need to know later about the butter trade. His enter-
prising boss was among the first to turn to this highly lucrative commodity. Esbensen bought butter 
on a large scale; although Lars Emil Bruun didn’t actually like butter, it was his job to sample butter 
from hundreds of barrels to ensure the quality of the merchandise. Esbensen packed the butter in 
small tin cans to ship it as a luxury item, especially to the warm countries of the world where butter 
was hardly used until then. Bruun fondly remembered this time, although the working hours now 
seem unimaginable: from 7:30 AM to 12:00 PM, from 12:30 PM to 4:00 PM, from 5:00 PM to 8:30 
PM, and from 9:00 PM to 10:30 PM, a total of 13 hours. On Thursdays, they worked far past mid-
night because the load had to be ready for the steamships that left for England every Friday morn-
ing. England was one of the most important markets for Danish butter, which led the coin collector 
Bruun to develop an interest in English coins.
P . F . Esbensen was becoming one of the largest butter traders in Denmark when Lars Emil’s father, 
Ole, reappeared to demand that his son drop everything to help him out of an economic crisis.
The Loss of the Family Fortune
One day, Lars Emil Bruun must have imagined throughout all those years, he would start his own 
company with his share of the family inheritance. But what he found in Ordrup at the beginning of 
1877 was an economic disaster. The family fortune had been squandered, and there were substantial 
debts on all the properties. Father Ole had tried to upgrade the family’s real estate through infra -
structural improvements to sell it at a high price. When he got into financial trouble due to the eco-
nomic impact of the Long Depression, which was also felt in Denmark, he turned to one of the worst 
usurers in Copenhagen. He could no longer manage the annual interest burden of 28-48%. Lars Emil 
Bruun was left to manage his father’s bankruptcy in an orderly manner and to ensure that the name 
Bruun retained its good reputation in business circles. He personally took responsibility for all debts 
that could no longer be covered by the family fortune, even though it would take many years.
In 1877, Lars Emil Bruun was at his lowest point. He had lost his job and any hope of an inheritance. 
His mother had 2 kroner a day to feed the entire family. That wasn’t even enough for a servant in a 
time when only the poor and dispossessed did the rough housework on their own.
It says a lot about Lars Emil Bruun that he even used this difficult time to learn. He essentially be-
came an apprentice again, working for room and board on an estate in southern Denmark, where he 
gained insight into the most modern techniques for butter and cheese production at that time. The 
detailed knowledge he acquired there would benefit him later.

========== PAGE 19 ==========

 P age xvii
                              Starting His Own Company
In April 1880, Lars Emil Bruun found a new position in the but-
ter business of C. E. W . Kramer and Wilhelm Bagger. However, 
Kramer, with whom Bruun got along well, died in 1882. Bruun 
did not get along with Bagger, so he decided to start his own 
company, “The Copenhagen Preserved Butter Company. ” In fact, 
he found two investors for this venture: a former farmer and a 
wholesaler.
Bruun had a loan of 60,000 kroner to work with, though it wasn’t 
a lavish amount. It was just enough to rent inexpensive premises 
and buy butter, which Bruun himself packed into cans with the 
help of a laborer and a cheap assistant.
Once again, Bruun faced bad luck: his two investors died unex -
pectedly within the first seven months. The death of the whole -
saler was particularly tragic: he cut himself on an opened butter 
can and died of blood poisoning. The heirs terminated Bruun’s 
loan and demanded their share of all profits earned so far within 
six months.
As soon as Bruun learned of this, he disappeared abroad, causing 
wild rumors in Copenhagen. Upon his return, he found his be -
loved mother on her deathbed. Bruun hurried to Ordrup to be by 
her side and bury her. Here, Lars Emil Bruun’s incredible tenacity 
showed: instead of being paralyzed by grief, he traveled around 
the country to buy all the butter he could get. It turned out that 
his trip abroad had been to secure orders. The young man had a 
full order book, which he “only” had to process. Within the three 
summer months of 1885, he earned enough to pay off his inves-
tors’ heirs, buy the family villa in Ordrup from his father, and 
build enough capital to continue his business.
                                                              Rising to Better Circles
Lars Emil Bruun was hardworking, skilled, reliable, and knew the 
industry better than anyone else. Under his leadership, “The Co-
penhagen Preserved Butter Company” became one of the lead -
ing exporters of Danish butter. In 1895, the company employed 
over 200 workers during the summer season, packing over a mil-
lion cans of butter. By 1900, Bruun declared an annual income of 
910,000 kroner. In 1917, according to his tax return, he possessed 
a fortune of 18 million kroner.
No wonder the higher society took notice of this successful en -
trepreneur. He was invited to events and involved in cultural 
projects. Bruun was one of the founding members in 1885 of the 
“Coin Collectors’ Society of Copenhagen. ” This was an honor back 
then. Such a coin society had at most one or two dozen members, 
all of whom were wealthy. A high membership fee and the guar-
antee required for joining prevented workers or employees from 
becoming members.
On the occasion of Lars Emil Bruun’s 
business’ 25th anniversary, his  
employees had a medal minted as 
a tribute to their celebrated employer. 
The medal was accompanied by  
a beautiful, calligraphic letter of 
congratulations. 
The label for L. E. Bruun’s 
world famous preserved butter. 


========== PAGE 20 ==========

Page xviii
The down-to-earth Bruun was probably fascinated and flat-
tered by all the attention he was now receiving. Did he fall in 
love with Ingeborg Bauditz because of this? After all, as we 
know from a letter dated May 26, 1886, he had been search -
ing for a suitable wife for a long time. Lars Emil Bruun was 
40 years old when he walked down the aisle with 28-year-old 
Ingeborg Bauditz on May 3, 1892. She came from the high so-
ciety in Copenhagen. Her maternal grandfather—a merchant 
and politician—was influential and wealthy. Her father came 
from an old Danish military dynasty with excellent connec -
tions to the royal court.
A Peasant Remains a Peasant—  
At Least to Copenhagen Society
Was it love that l ed Ingeborg to say yes? Or did she marry 
Bruun because she had no other choice? We will never know. 
A photo taken in 1897 already hints at the couple’s estrange-
ment: Ingeborg stands facing forward, without paying atten-
tion to her husband, who is almost desperately holding onto her arm.
How unhappy the marriage was is evidenced by a letter from 
Lars Emil Bruun on their eighth wedding anniversary. In it, 
he says that his wife never took an interest in his business. 
She only sought her own pleasure, putting his reputation at 
risk due to all her male acquaintances. Being a child of his 
time, Bruun blamed his wife and demanded that she funda-
mentally change: “I myself am unhappy, and only you can 
change everything if you want to; but you must completely 
change your behavior, otherwise it will not work, I assure you 
that. I send you these lines to ask you to stop and change for 
me and your children; otherwise, it will be a terrible catastro-
phe for me and the children, remember that. ”
Perhaps it was insurmountable differences in mentality that 
separated Lars Emil Bruun from Ingeborg. He came from the 
simplest background; she was a product of the better Copen-
hagen society. Lars Emil Bruun neither shared the prejudices 
of the old-established wholesalers, nor did he have a sense 
for their moral concepts. What were they to think of a company boss who personally ensured that 
his illegitimate sister found a good position? Who took the time to personally write a condolence 
letter just because the wife of one of his many subordinates had died? How much empathy Lars Emil 
Bruun showed for his staff is evident from excerpts from his diaries. This was not common. And 
then there was, of course, the incident that split the numismatic society.
It all began with the board’s decision in 1894 to issue a medal. This was an economic gamble, as even 
if each of the 24 members bought a medal, the costs for design, die cutting, and production were far 
from covered. Therefore, some members, including Bruun, promised to purchase not just one, but 
several medals. But even that didn’t help. The sale turned into a financial disaster. The association’s 
treasury was facing a dramatic loss. In this situation, the association’s president, Vilhelm Bergsøe, 
went to Bruun. What exactly happened during that meeting, we will probably never know. Bergsøe 
told everyone that Bruun had refused to buy ten medals at 5 kroner each, which he had agreed to. 
Bruun remembered the visit very differently. He confronted Bergsøe about it. Bergsøe avoided the 
unpleasant argument and called the wholesale merchant Bruun a “peasant. ” Bruun retaliated by 
indirectly calling Bergsøe a liar. An incredible scandal! Neither of them backed down. A heated ex-
Ingebord and Lars Emil Bruun on the 
Wednesday before Easter 1897. 
Ingebord and Lars Emil Bruun 
with their son Eivin in 1893. 

========== PAGE 21 ==========

 P age xix
change of letters ensued, leading to the entire board resigning. The association existed thereafter in 
name only. And all because of 50 kroner—a lot of money for an apprentice, nothing for an industrial 
magnate.
What might Ingeborg have thought about this? A more understanding wife might have explained 
the rules of her social class to her husband. But would Lars Emil Bruun have listened to her? The fact 
is that the marriage was dissolved in January 1906. Custody of the  three children—Eivin, Hans, and 
Eleanor—was awarded to the father.
                                                                     New Marriage, New Happiness
On October 14, 1908, Lars Emil Bruun married for the sec -
ond time. This time, his bride did not come from high so -
ciety, but from the same social class he himself belonged to. 
The 28-year-old Pauline Antoinette Juliane Kjær, affection-
ately called Tony, was the daughter of a landowner. In a letter, 
Bruun expressed his hope “that this marriage will be happier 
than my first and that God will grant me the peace for the rest 
of my life that I so deeply long for. ”
A European Tragedy
In fact, the marriage to Tony was a very happy one. Lars Emil 
Bruun’s travel diaries bear witness to a deep mutual affection 
and consideration. However, the much longed-for peace was 
not granted to the successful merchant, nor to all the other 
citizens of Europe. The brutal battles before, during and after 
the First World War took the life of his eldest son, Leofred 
Eivin Bauditz Bruun, who was born on March 2, 1893.
The father did not have to blame himself for not taking care 
of his child. Although he sent his 13-year old son to the well-known boarding school in Birkerød 
after the divorce, the family would reunite once a year during the winter for three months to spend 
the holidays together on the French Riviera. Thus, 
the fate of Eivin is one of the great tragedies in the 
life of Lars Emil Bruun. His son was not a born busi-
nessman like his father but was passionate about the 
military. At 19, he eagerly and unpreparedly volun-
teered for the First Balkan War. Fortune favored him: 
he did not have to fight in a major battle. Instead, 
the dashing Eivin fought in smaller skirmishes with 
Turkish troops and Albanian bandits; he enjoyed the 
displays of appreciation from the local population 
and dreamed of a heroic battle against all evil.
Upon his return, he pursued a career in the Danish 
Army. Thus, he was spared the brutal reality of the 
trenches during World War I. Denmark was neutral; 
the Danish army was not deployed. In 1918, Eivin was discharged at the end of the war. But in Janu-
ary 1919, without consulting his father, he hurried to Estonia to defend Tallinn, a city with close his-
torical ties to Denmark, against the Bolsheviks. As fate would have it, Eivin sustained a fatal injury 
during a “heroic” mission. At great personal risk, two medics rescued him from being captured by 
the Reds. It was in vain. Eivin died after five days in a field hospital. All that was left for his father was 
to bring the body home at his own expense, costing 822.75 kroner. The local newspaper of Gentofte 
reported on Eivin’s funeral: the coffin was draped in the Danish and the Estonian flag. It was almost 
hidden under all the wreaths from Estonia, Latvia, and Denmark. Did it ease the father’s pain that 
his son was celebrated as a ‘Danish hero’ by the media?
An oil chalk drawing of L. E. Bruun by 
Danish artist Peter Severin Krøyer
L. E. Bruun’s children Eivin, Hans,  
and Eleanor in 1903. 

========== PAGE 22 ==========

Page xx
We know that both father and son believed in military heroism. This is evidenced by the large dona-
tion Bruun made to the French town of Pont-à-Mousson. The location was carefully chosen. Pont-
à-Mousson was not just any town. Its residents had been awarded the War Cross with Palm by the 
French government in 1921 and the Cross of the Legion of Honour in 1922. During the First World 
War, fierce battles had raged here, costing nearly 7,000 French and German lives. The civilian popu-
lation of the town temporarily shrank to less than 50 residents. Lars Emil Bruun handed the mayor 
of Pont-à-Mousson a substantial donation to establish a children’s home for the children of the slain 
civilians, which he visited in person.
The 1920 Trip to the USA
Since Lars Emil Bruun could afford it, he had undertaken extensive travels with a varying agenda. 
He visited the agents and customers of his butter empire personally, got to know the wide world, 
and purchased coins from dealers around the globe. We have detailed travel diaries from two major 
trips he took with his wife Tony. They bring us closer to the man Lars Emil Bruun and testify to his 
numismatic passion.
During his trip to the United States, he of course visited the collector Virgil Michael Brand, who is 
still very well known today. In his diary, Bruun describes the peculiar circumstances under which 
Brand lived in his brewery, which had been shut down due to the Prohibition. Somewhat conde -
scendingly, he notes that “the man looked like a small German innkeeper” and mockingly remarks 
that “his inner self mentally corresponds to his outer appearance. ” Bruun pities him for keeping all 
his coins in the bank vault out of fear that they might be stolen. Therefore, Brand could show him 
only a few coins, including some extremely rare pieces: 5-Guineas of James II and George II, all in 
mint state. Ever the selfish collector, Bruun hopes that Brand won’t turn to Danish coins, because 
“then they would become expensive in the future!”
The Final Years
The somewhat caustic humor that emerges from the records of 
1920 may be related to Bruun’s struggle with the early symp-
toms of his diabetes. Today, we have forgotten the terrible ef-
fects this disease had before the discovery of insulin. Those 
who developed diabetes back then had at most two or three 
years left. They literally starved, wasting away to the bone, be-
fore falling into a diabetic coma and dying.
The turning point cam e with the discovery by Frederick G. 
Banting and Charles H. Best in 1921. In 1922, they saved the 
first diabetes patient in a Canadian hospital. Since February 
1923, insulin was also being produced in Denmark. The coun-
try was among the first three European nations where doctors 
used insulin. Bruun also received this treatment. However, it 
proved fatal for him that this new treatment method had not 
yet become established in France and Italy.
Bruun did not forgo his usual winter vacation in Monte Carlo. 
Insulin was regularly sent to him. But in November 1923, the package was lost. The Italian doctors 
refused to procure a replacement. This refusal cost Bruun his life. He died from diabetic shock on 
November 21, 1923, at the age of 72. His body was transported to Gentofte, where he was interred in 
the family crypt on December 27, 1923.


========== PAGE 23 ==========

 P age xxi
The Evolution of the L. E. B ruun Collection
Many of you have undoubtedly encountered some version of the joke “The best way to make a small 
fortune in the stock market is to start with a large one. ” Well if we can call L. E. Bruun’s current 20,000 
piece collection of coins, medals and banknotes “small, ” then we can alter the joke to “The best way 
to assemble a small collection of coins is to start with a large one. ”  And in some ways, this is what  
L. E. Bruun did over his nearly 65 years of collecting. However, rather than cleaving off large sections 
of a gargantuan collection, the trajectory of Bruun’s collection as it stands now was a much more 
curated and organic process. 
In an interview on the occasion of his 70th birthday published in the 
March 17, 1922 issue of Danish weekly Hver 8 Dag, Bruun related that 
the origins of his collection extend back to 1859, when an uncle had 
passed away, leaving some coins that were distributed among the chil-
dren in the family. Bruun was about seven years old at the time, an age 
when many children collect something as a means of learning about 
their environment. For most, this is a passing phase in childhood de-
velopment. For a precious few, it is just the beginning, with collect -
ing becoming a lifelong “unruly passion, ” as one author has styled it. 
Bruun was among those precious few. 
Even as a young apprentice in Holbӕk with no disposable income, he 
managed to collect coins, documenting 49 silver coins and 87 coppers 
from around the world in an 1867 listing of his collection, when he 
was just 15 years old. His collecting continued and blossomed in the 
1880s when his butter wholesale and export business took off; this became the inflection point in his 
financial life that provided the resources to buy not only individual coins but even entire collections 
of them. 
He originally and naturally focused on the coins of Denmark and Norway, quickly building up what 
he considered the largest collections in these fields, buying both privately and at public auctions such 
as the sales of the Alfred Benzon collection in Copenhagen in the 1880s. A more complete view of 
the sources, both public and private, for the Scandinavian coins in the Bruun Collection may be seen 
in the list of “Important Auctions and Private Purchases” , provided as an appendix to this auction 
catalog. The listing is a veritable who’s who of Scandinavian numismatics during not only Bruun’s 
lifetime but also the century before. 
He added Swe dish coins to the mix and then English coins in the 1890s, buying at many of the 
famous name sales in England: Montagu, Murdoch, Hilton, Price, Rashleigh, Roth, Walters, and 
Carlyon-Britton. 
The butter business, along with his shrewd investments in real estate on the outskirts of Copen -
hagen, provided the means to collect coins at a high level. The coins provided an escape from the 
day-to-day of the business world, as he related in the Hver 8 Dag interview: “The good thing about 
collecting coins is that when you are upset about something or you feel unsettled, then you go and 
look at your coins, and then you calm down by studying them again and again pondering the many 
unsolved problems they present. People who are exclusively devoted to their business make a great 
mistake. I, for one, could never imagine thinking about nothing but butter until my dying days. ”
His rise to prominence in the field of Danish numismatics landed him an invitation to become a 
founding member of the Danish Numismatic Society in 1885, which undoubtedly provided op -
portunities to rub shoulders with the prominent Danish numismatists of the day and acquire coins 
privately. The pace and extent of his collecting must have been such that he felt the need to sell and 
trade coins during his lifetime, and he is known to have traded items privately within the numismat-
ic milieu of fin-de-siècle Copenhagen. He also auctioned off more than 1,000 lots of coins through 
L. E. Bruun in 1922, around 
the time of his 70th birthday. 

========== PAGE 24 ==========

Page xxii
a general auction in 1894, a named single-owner sale in 1898, and an anonymous single-owner sale 
in 1901. 
He was convinced to start auctioning off his Swedish collection, which he felt was the best in pri-
vate hands, a decision he came to regret. The first auction was through Adolph Hess in Frankfurt 
in May 1914, and a second auction was planned for October 1914, but those plans were scuttled by 
the outbreak of World War I. The coins intended for the second auction were instead sold to Swed-
ish merchant and big-time collector Israël Berghman (1864-1945), who sold off a few duplicates at 
auction in 1918. Berghman sold the remainder of the Bruun collection en bloc to Amsterdam dealer 
Jacques Schulman, who in turn resold the collection intact to famed American beer brewer and col-
lector extraordinaire Virgil Brand. 
Bruun’s two biggest coups came late in his life. In 1918, he purchased the entire coin collection of 
J.G. Guildal, who had himself swallowed up the entire collection of Major General Carl Thorvald 
Jørgensen (1819-1902) in 1901. Bruun’s crowning achievement, though, was the 1922 acquisition 
of the multigenerational Countship of Brahesminde Collection, built by the Bille-Brahe clan com-
mencing circa 1800. Additional details on these important collectors and collections can be found in 
this catalog on page 93 (Guildal) and page 31 (Brahesminde). 
Bruun’s collections were already quite advanced at the time of these two 
important acquisitions, which resulted in a fair amount of duplication in 
the resulting blended collection. Bruun himself sold off some of the Guil-
dal duplicates to prominent Danish collectors, but it wasn’t until after his 
passing that the Bille-Brahe collection was fully integrated into Bruun’s. 
The duplicates, selected by Danish numismatists Georg Galster and Hans 
Henrik Schou, were sold at auction under the auspices of Holger Hede in 
a 6,241 lot auction in October 1925. Also in 1925 were a pair of auctions 
by Sotheby’s in London that dispersed his British, Continental and Amer-
ican collections, while over 500 medieval pennies of Northumberland, 
Ireland, as well as Nordic imitations of Aethelred’s coins were donated 
to the Danish Royal Collection of Coins and Medals by a provision of 
Bruun’s will.
Given its depth and size, the Bille-Brahe collection was long considered a 
reserve for the Danish National Collection, a mantle that passed to Bruun 
with the acquisition of the Bille-Brahe cabinet. As a patriotic Dane and the 
most prominent collector of his day, Bruun took seriously the idea that his collection was now an 
informal reserve for the Danish National Collection. Though Copenhagen and all Denmark were 
spared the destruction suffered by much of Europe during World War I, he was keenly aware that 
Copenhagen had been mostly destroyed by British bombardment in 1807, and that a future world 
conflagration could result in the loss or destruction of the National Collection. In 1922 he amended 
his will to formalize the concept of his collection acting as a reserve for the National Collection: “For 
a period of 100 years after my death, the collection shall serve as a reserve for the Royal Coin and 
Medal Collection in Copenhagen in the sense that if it should be substantially destroyed by fire or 
lost by theft or other such event, my collection shall be offered to the State as a gift. ” However, should 
the next century pass with the national collection intact, “it shall be sold at public auction and the 
proceeds shall accrue to the persons who are my direct descendants. ”
On November 21, 2023, exactly 100 years after Bruun’s death, the waiting period ran out. With the 
Royal Danish Coin and Medal Collection intact, L. E. Bruun’s fantastic 20,000-piece collection of 
Danish, Norwegian and Swedish numismatics built and curated through decades of acquisitions 
and conscious whittling, became destined for the auction block. The fruits of nearly 200 years of la-
bor of generations of collector-curators, culminating with L. E. Bruun, will re-enter the numismatic 
marketplace over the coming years through a series of Stack’s Bowers Galleries auctions, the first of 
which is now in your hands.
The catalog of the  
L. E. Bruun Collection  
duplicates sold at auction 
in Copenhagen in  
October 1925.

========== PAGE 25 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com Pa ge 1
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Saturday , September 14, 2024, 2:00 PM Copenhagen Time
Saturday , September 14, 2024, 5:00 AM Pacific Time
Lots 1001-1286
lot 1021
A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Part I
           THE
L. E. BRUUN
              COLLECTION

========== PAGE 26 ==========

Page 2 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Denmark, which has been an independent nation for more than 1,000 years, is among the oldest kingdoms in the 
world, and has only been ruled by monarchs who branch from one and the same family tree. 
International barter trade was already a reality in Denmark in pre-historic times. Amber, flint and fur continued to 
be important export commodities from the late Stone Age to the Viking Age, with metals like copper and tin being 
among the key imports. The oldest coins that to some degree seem to have been used in transactions in Denmark are 
Roman Denarii from the first century AD.
The one-sided and very thin, but beautiful and highly sophisticated Gold Bracteates from the so-called “migration 
period” (c. 400-600 AD) were clearly inspired by Roman and Byzantine portrait medallions, with the imperial image 
being transformed into a god from the Nordic pantheon. These Bracteates, however, featured a loop so they could be 
used as pendants signalling the high social status of the owners. Although they have always been highly coveted by 
numismatists, including L. E. Bruun, they are not to be considered coins.
During most of the Viking Age foreign coins (Arabic Dirhems, German and Carolingian Denarii, English Pennies 
etc.) played an important role in payments, but only based on their weight in silver. This is clearly evidenced by the 
many archaeological silver hoards that contain bent and cut coins alongside hack silver made from scraps of silver 
jewelry and bars.
The earliest coins struck in Denmark are small, so-called Wodan/Monster-sceats, some of which seem to have been 
minted in Ribe around 720 -750 AD. The first coins which can clearly be associated with a king are the “cross coin-
age” struck in Hedeby for the first Christian king, Harald Bluetooth (Blåtand), who incidentally has given name to 
the wireless technology standard that even uses a logo with Harald’s initials written in runes.
The first truly national, royal coinage bearing the name of the king are the Pennies struck around 995 AD during 
the reign of Sweyn Forkbeard (Svend Tveskæg), the first Viking king of both Denmark and England. It is today an 
exceedingly rare coin, and were it not for an example in the Bruun Collection it would be considered completely out 
of bounds for collectors.
From 995 AD to the reign of Erik of Pomerania (1396-1439) only one denomination was minted, a small silver coin 
called a penning (Penny). The weight, which in the 11th century was somewhat higher in the east of Denmark (Sca-
nia, Zealand and Funen) than in the west (Jutland), was fairly consistent around 1 gm. The silver content however 
gradually diminished, reaching an all time low during the so-called Civil War period (1241-1377).
Inspired by the Hanseatic Schilling, Christopher of Bavaria c. 1440 introduced the Skilling which was struck in 
Scania. Although the size and both actual and relative value would vary considerably, this denomination and its 
multiples would be the most widely used coins in Denmark until the Skilling was discontinued with the monetary 
reform of 1873.
In 1448 Christopher of Bavaria died without heirs, and the Privy 
Council had to look abroad to find a suitable successor of interna -
tional stature. The choice fell upon count Christian of Oldenburg, 
who was a direct descendent of the Danish king, Erik Klipping 
(1259-1286). 
All the way through to the death of Frederik VII in 1863, each and 
every Danish kings has descended in a straight line from Christian 
of Oldenburg, who became known in history as Christian I of Den-
mark (and eventually Norway and Sweden). For Christian’s entire 
33 year long reign, the only coins minted in Denmark were the de -
cidedly unimpressive series of Hvide (4-Pennies / Witten) struck in 
Malmø in Scania. 
Following the death of Christian in 1481, however, a numismatic 
revolution was near at hand.
BARTER, STANDARDS OF V ALUE,
AND COINS IN DENMARK BEFORE 1481
Map of Denmark from the Atlas “Theatrum  
orbis terrarum”, 1570. World Digital Library.
THE COINAGE OF DENMARK

========== PAGE 27 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com Pa ge 3
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
King Hans, born in Ålborg in Northern Jutland in 1455, acceded to the throne of 
Denmark in 1481 after the death of his father Christian I, who had reigned over 
Denmark for more than three decades. 
Any discussion centered on the subject of Scandinavian monarchy would be in -
complete without mention of the Kalmar Union, a geopolitical union of Denmark, 
Norway, and Sweden (as well as several overseas possessions like Iceland, Green -
land, and the Faroe Islands, among others). Established under the reign of Queen 
Margrethe I of Denmark in 1397, the Kalmar Union remained intact, if unstable 
and with several periods of discontinuity, until the War of Swedish Liberation that 
began in 1521, which effectively ended the Union in 1523 with the installation of 
Gustav Vasa as King of Sweden. Under the terms of the Kalmar Union, the realms 
were to remain independent nations united by a single sovereign, and the impetus 
for such an alliance was, in part, a response to the growing power of the Hanseatic 
League operating in central and northern Europe at the time.
Though technically elected King of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden by the Council 
of the Realm, Hans encountered obstacles to his accession and was forced to resort 
to military measures after attempts at diplomacy failed to secure him the throne 
of Sweden. A short campaign ensued in the form of the Battle of Rotebro in October of 1497, after which Hans was 
ultimately crowned King of Sweden. 
The first Danish gold coins were struck under King Hans, likely in connection with the Swedish offensive. The stun-
ning gold Noble, struck in 1496 and dated as such, is evocative of the English nobles, though was actually modeled 
on the Goulden Reaal, or Real d’Or, from the Netherlands. Dating coins was still a somewhat novel concept in 1496, 
and this type was not only one of the first gold coins struck in Denmark, but also the first dated coin struck by the 
Danish kingdom.
King Hans also oversaw the striking of the Goldgulden (Rhinsk Gulden), the Danish answer to the Rhenish Gulden 
that was the currency du jour for large payments and accounting. Coinage of the Skilling and the Hvid continued, 
though the poor quality of the small coinage ultimately resulted in the addition of a provision to improve the quality 
of coinage in Christian II’s coronation charter. 
King Hans died in 1513 at Aalborghus Castle (the place of his birth), and the throne passed to his son Christian II. 
His wife, Queen Christina, commissioned the German sculptor Claus Berg to design a burial chapel, and the intri -
cately carved Gothic altarpiece is now revered as one of Denmark’s national treasures.
King Hans’ sister was queen of Scotland from 1469 to 1486 by way of her marriage to King James III.
(REIGNED 1481-1513)
King Hans by Joseph Brecheisen 
(c.1720 - 1766)
HANS

========== PAGE 28 ==========

Page 4 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 29 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com Pa ge 5
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
A Coin of the Highest Importance, a Hans Noble!
Unique in Private Hands with Only a Few in Public Collections
1001
DENMARK. Noble, 1496. Malmö or Copenhagen Mint. Hans. NGC AU-55.  Fr-3; Galster-24; Sieg-12; 
Schou-2; Beskrivelsen 1791-pl. 1, 2; Schive-pl. XIV , 38; Bruun-3831. Weight: 14.67 gms. UNIQUE in private 
hands with only 2 in museums, the National Museum of Denmark and the Hermitage in St. Petersburg; a 
third, unconfirmed example in a European museum is rumored to exist.
The jewel in the crown of any collection of Scandinavian numismatics, being one of the oldest Scandinavian 
gold coins, the first dated Scandinavian coin (not counting the mysterious Danish 1234 Penny) and one of the 
most beautiful Gothic coins produced in Scandinavia. To say that the condition of this example is beautiful 
would be a severe understatement for a large sized gold coin from the late 15th century. The strike is perfect, 
the many intricate details are clearly visible, the flan is even, traces of original luster abound, and no traces 
of mounting are to be found. In short, an almost unbelievable survival from the late middle-ages, and just as 
worthy in a collection of medieval art as in a coin collection.
Of all the Danish Nobles struck between 1496 and 1532 for the kings, Hans, Christian II, and Frederik I only 
20 remain, most of them in the National Museum of Denmark. 
The model for the design was clearly the ‘Real d’Or’, struck in Dordrecht, for the Holy Roman Emperor, Maximilian 
I (1490-1519). The obverse legend is however an unusual example where the coin itself seems to be talking: IOhS’ 
DEI GRA REX DANOR’ IVSSIT ME FIERI AN’1496 (“Hans, by the Grace of God, King of the Danes, ordered 
me struck in the year 1496”). The religious reverse inscription: DEXTERA DNI’ EXALTAt ME DEXTRA DNI’ 
FECIT VIRTV’ is taken from Psalm 118:16 of the Bible (“The Lord’s right hand is lifted high; the Lord’s right 
hand has done mighty things!”).
Although the exact reason for minting this Noble is unknown, it seems likely that it was struck for the king’s 
personal use as a gift for foreign dignitaries at a prominent courtly event in Denmark or abroad.
Continued on Page 6

========== PAGE 30 ==========

Page 6 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
The gold for this emission was partly obtained from loans from German princes partly from the Sound Dues 
(Øresundstolden). This tax, which was collected at Elsinore (Helsingør) where Eric of Pomerania had built a 
castle in the 1420s, meant that all foreign ships with the intention of passing through the strait between Zeeland 
(Sjælland) and Scania (Skåne) had to pay a toll of one English Noble to the Danish king.
In the mid 19th century this piece was owned by the internationally famous antiquarian, numismatist and 
director of the National Museum of Denmark, Christian Jurgensen Thomsen (1788-1865), who is considered the 
originator of the three-age system of European antiquity, dividing pre-history into a stone, a bronze and an iron 
age. Thomsen was also a prominent numismatist, and in many ways his collection of European medieval coins 
has never been surpassed. The coin was subsequently bought by count Preben Charles Bille-Brahe-Selby (1842-
1918) at the auction in Copenhagen in 1876 for the at the time gigantic sum of DKK 920, which was by far the 
highest price obtained among the more than 12,000 medieval coins offered.
€300,000-€600,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Christian Jürgensen Thomsen Collection (Copenhagen - 1876) Lot # 11138.
 
Rare and Elusive Goldgulden From the Reign of Hans
1002
DENMARK. Goldgulden (Rhinsk Gulden), ND (ca. 1496-1497). Malmö or Copenhagen Mint. Hans. 
NGC EF-45. Fr-4; Galster-27A; Sieg-10; Schou 3; Bruun-3840. Weight: 3.17 gms. Mintmaster: Herman 
van Nassau or Hans Sever. A wonderful example of one of Denmark’s first gold coins, struck to finance the 
German mercenaries in the war against the Swedish rebel king, Sten Gustafsson Sture. Displaying a handsome 
retained brilliance, with only light instances of actual circulation.  
The coin was formerly in the collection of the legal councillor Frederik Christian Bech (1817-1905) who acted as 
a judge in the city of Slagelse for an impressive period of 36 years, giving it an impressive pedigree in addition to 
all of its other attributes.
€20,000-€30,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Frederik Christian Bech Collection (Copenhagen - 1906) Lot # 1604.

========== PAGE 31 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com Pa ge 7
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Born on July 1, 1481, in Nyborg Castle, Denmark, Christian II was the eldest son 
of King Hans of Denmark and Christina of Saxony. Upon the death of his father 
in 1513, Christian II ascended to the throne, and his reign would leave a lasting 
impact on Denmark and the wider Scandinavian region. His marriage to the Haps-
burg princess Isabella of Austria, younger sister to the future emperor Charles V , 
seemed to position Christian in a way that no Danish ruler had been positioned 
heretofore. Despite this, Christian II’s reign would witness the destruction of the 
Kalmar Union and his own exile and eventual imprisonment, earning himself the 
moniker “Christian the Tyrant” in Sweden along the way.
Throughout his life, Christian demonstrated strong bourgeois sympathies; his 
disdain for the privileged class often brought him into conflict with the Danish 
nobility, though he was able to rely on the support of the Church to counterbal-
ance this instability. One of his closest advisors was Sigbrit Willums, the successful 
merchantwoman and the mother of his mistress Dyveke, much to the dismay of his 
other advisors of more noble birth.
At the time of his accession to the throne, Sweden had been under the governance 
of a succession of regencies, culminating in a political skirmish between Gustav 
Trolle and Sten Sture the Y ounger that saw Sten Sture the Y ounger emerge as regent 
in 1512. Trolle allied himself with Christian II, and would eventually be rewarded for his loyalty by being appointed 
Archbishop of Uppsala. Christian II invaded Sweden in January of 1520 and was installed as King of Sweden by 
November of that same year.
In a ruthless and calculated move to cement his position on the Union throne, Christian II capped off his coronation 
celebrations by rounding up nearly one hundred Swedish leaders and noble guests and imprisoning them in Tre Kro-
nor castle. The following day they were deemed heretics and promptly executed; the royal executioner noted that 82 
souls perished via beheading or hanging, and then burned on a massive funeral pyre. Sten Sture, who had perished 
after being wounded in battle in 1520, was exhumed and thrown on the fire for good measure. This grisly vignette 
came to be known as the Stockholm Bloodbath.
Despite this brutal show of authority, the Stockholm Bloodbath proved to be not the death knell but the rallying 
point for resistance, whose movement gained strength under the young Gustav Vasa. Charming and eloquent, Vasa’s 
movement began slowly but steadily and by 1523 his army of rebels had expelled Archbishop Trolle (Christian II’s 
surrogate) and was elected King of Sweden.
Things only deteriorated for Christian II at home, where heavy taxation bred general discontent and his relationship 
with the papacy began to fracture as he welcomed German humanist scholars and Lutheran preachers to the univer-
sity in Copenhagen. December 1522 saw open rebellion, his uncle Frederik of Holstein was provisionally declared 
King of Denmark in March 1523, and in April 1523 he sailed for the Netherlands, hoping to enlist foreign aid and 
return to regain his throne, a hope that proved futile. After a failed invasion of Norway in 1531, he was promised safe 
conduct to parley by his uncle Frederik, who swiftly reneged on that promise and imprisoned Christian. Christian II 
spent the last 27 years of his life as a prisoner, albeit a noble one, and died at the castle in Kalundborg in 1559.
Coinage under Christian II is represented in this auction by the 1523 silver Gulden. These Guldens were likely taken 
abroad with Christian as he left Denmark in search of foreign support for a military campaign that seemed increas-
ingly necessary were he ever to regain his throne. The silver Guldens of 1523 represents the monarch’s last official 
coinage, though coins were struck in his name by his supporters until 1536.  
(REIGNED 1513-1523)
King Christian II by 
Pieter van Coninxloo (1460–1513)
CHRISTIAN II

========== PAGE 32 ==========

Page 8 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Nicely Toned and Appealing Silver Gulden
1003
DENMARK. Silver Gulden, 1523. Malmö Mint. Christian II. NGC VF-35.  Dav-8220; Galster-38; Sieg-
9; Schou-3; Bruun-3933. Weight: 29.49 gms. Mintmaster: Jørgen Kock. An unusually nice example of this 
important Silver Gulden for which the design was copied from the spectacular gold Noble of king Hans. Kock 
was appointed mayor of Malmö in 1523 partly for having assisted king Christian in financing his wars against 
Sweden by issuing debased and clipped coins. The present type is, however, struck in fine silver, presumably 
for the king’s personal use during his travels in the Netherlands and Germany and to remunerate foreign 
mercenary soldiers. 
The first silver Gulden - and the ancestor of all Taler-sized coins - was minted in Hall in 1486 with the idea of 
producing a silver coin with the same value as the Gold Gulden.
€4,000-€5,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 33 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com Pa ge 9
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Frederik I, born on October 7, 1471, in Haderslev, Denmark as the youngest son 
of King Christian I and the brother of Hans, acceded to the Danish throne in 1523 
following his nephew Christian II’s ousting and subsequent exile. Where Christian 
II failed to establish lasting and stable relationships with both the nobility and the 
Church, Frederik was able to succeed. He was elected King of Norway in 1524, 
though he never actually set foot there (he spent most of his reign in Schleswig) 
and therefore was never formally crowned, leading to him being styled as “King of 
Denmark, the Vends and the Goths, elected King of Norway. ” 
Frederik I’s reign was marked by several uprisings in support of his deposed nephew 
Christian II, though none were successful, and he ultimately imprisoned Christian 
after his failed military incursion in Norway. With echoes of his nephew’s ruthless 
actions during the Stockholm Bloodbath, he offered Christian II safe conduct for 
parley then reneged on his offer and imprisoned his nephew for the rest of his life.
Though Frederik I was Catholic, he tolerated the spread of Lutheran teachings and 
ideas in a way that garnered supported from the masses, even naming Hans Tausen 
(often called the “Danish Luther”) as his personal chaplain to help him avoid per-
secution. He was the last Catholic monarch to rule Denmark.
Frederik I died in April 1533 at the age of 61, and is buried in Schleswig Cathedral.
Frederik attempted to recall some of the poor coinage that had circulated under Christian II through a program of 
redeeming the clipped coins (“Klippings”) for their actual value in new Skillings, though this unsurprisingly proved 
unpopular; eventually, it was decided to simply remint the clipped Skillings. Orders were also given to strike Nobles 
and silver Guldens, though it appears these were never struck in any great quantity. 
Goldguldens were struck in 1527 and 1531, likely for the payment of large sums in support of Frederik’s military 
responses to Christian’s attempts to regain the throne. These depict the king himself (and not St. Cnut as on the Gul-
dens struck under King Hans—note the absence of a halo around the figure’s head), presumably a nod to his role as 
the sworn protector of the kingdom.
(REIGNED 1523-1533)
King Frederik I by 
Jacob Binck (1500–1569)
FREDERIK I

========== PAGE 34 ==========

Page 10 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Attractively Detailed Goldgulden of Frederik I
1004
DENMARK. Goldgulden (Rhinsk Gulden), 1527. Malmö Mint. Frederik I. NGC AU Details—Cleaned.  
Fr-10; Galster-59; Jensen & Skjoldager-T21/25; Sieg-35; Schou-1; Bruun-4056. Weight: 3.28 gms. Mintmaster: 
Jørgen Kock. A very nice example of an excessively rare early gold type that is never seen on the market. A 
faint reddish hue adorns the obverse, promoting the delicate yet clearly defined details. Well-centered and 
struck on a clean planchet.
Whereas the obverse closely copies a design from his predecessor, the four shields on the reverse surrounding the 
national coat of arms with the three lions symbolizes different parts of the realm: Schleswig (2 lions), Holstein (a 
nettle leaf), the Wends (a wyvern - a mythological dragon) and Norway (an axe-bearing, upright lion).
This great rarity was formerly in the collection of councellor Hans Henrik Frost (1766-1825), who occupied 
a position as inspector at the Royal Orphanage in Copenhagen. At his estate auction it was acquired by the 
publisher Carl Friederich Schubart (1759-1830) who had actually printed the catalog for the auction.
€40,000-€60,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Carl Friderich Schubart Collection (Copenhangen - 1831) Lot # 295.
Ex: Hans Henrik Frost Collection (Copenhagen - 1826) Lot # 1 (page 45).

========== PAGE 35 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 11
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Christian III, born at Gottorp Castle in Schleswig in 1503, was the eldest son of 
Frederik I and Anna of Brandenburg. Unlike his father, who was an avowed Cath-
olic but tolerated the spread of Lutheran ideas, Christian made no secret of his 
Lutheranism, which was surely influenced by two figures that loomed large in his 
younger years. His teacher Wolfgang von Utenhof and his Lutheran tutor, the mili-
tary general Johann Rantzau, were zealous reformers by whose urging he found 
himself at the Diet of Worms in 1521 listening to the testimony of the famed Mar-
tin Luther.
Upon his father’s death in 1533, the Council of the Realm refused to elect the 
prince and postponed the decision by a year, during which time Count Christo-
pher of Oldenburg (grand-nephew of Christian I) attempted a restoration of the 
imprisoned King Christian II. Christian II still retained widespread support of the 
peasant masses, who saw him as a champion against noble privilege.
In what became known as the Count’s Feud (or the Count’s War), various battles 
were fought between Christian III’s (protestant) German mercenaries and the 
peasant forces that supported the restoration of Christian II. Christian III’s forces 
were able to quash these uprisings; Count Christopher and his forces retreated 
to Malmo and Copenhagen, where they eventually surrendered after a months-  
long siege. 
The two most significant outcomes of the Count’s Feud and of Christian III’s reign overall is the establishment of 
Lutheranism as the national church in 1536 and the annexation of Norway following his quick suppression of the 
Catholic holdouts in the realm. In stark contrast to the more equitable relationship that previously existed during 
the Kalmar Union, the charter declared, “Norway shall henceforth be and remain under the Crown of Denmark, the 
same as any of the other provinces…and it shall henceforth neither be nor be called a kingdom in itself. ”
1
Christian III was formally crowned in 1537, and the remaining 22 years of his reign were relatively peaceful. He died 
on New Y ears day in 1559 at Koldinghus Castle in Denmark, and was interred in Roskilde Cathedral in a funerary 
monument designed by Flemish sculptor Cornelis Floris de Vriendt.
The Count’s Feud left a lasting impression on Danish numismatics, with coins struck by Christopher of Oldenburg 
bearing the portrait of the exiled King Christian II during his failed bid for restoration. A great number of poor qual-
ity coins were struck by the Danish state during the early tumultuous years of Christian III’s reign when cash was 
needed quickly to pay the troops. 
The Taler was quickly becoming an important coin in European monetary systems, and in 1537, Joachimsdalers 
(Talers) were struck for the first time in Denmark. The quality was good, but procuring enough silver to strike these 
in any great quantity proved impossible, and the poor base coinage would continue to dominate until 1540, when 
serious attempts were made to remove them from circulation.
In 1541, a new monetary system was introduced that called for the striking of 1 and ½ Marks, 4 Skillings, Skillings, 
Hvids, and Pennings; striking of Joachimsdalers was resumed in 1544. On the whole, the quality of coinage was 
vastly improved.
1Dahl, T., Coldevin, A., and Screiner, J. (editors): Vårt Folks Historie, (9 vols), Oslo, 1961-4), Section 3, 212.
(REIGNED 1534-1559)
King Christian III by 
Jacob Binck (1500–1569)
CHRISTIAN III

========== PAGE 36 ==========

Page 12 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Charmingly Toned and Pleasing Joachimsdaler
1005
DENMARK. Joachimsdaler (Taler), 1537. Copenhagen Mint; mm: Clover. Christian III. NGC EF-40. 
Dav-8226; Galster-102; Sieg-19; Schou-8; Bruun-4276. Weight: 28.69 gms. Mintmaster: Reynold Junge. A 
exquisite example of this early Danish Taler struck the year after the Danish Reformation. The model was the 
silver coins minted in the German city of Joachimsthal by the counts of Schlick. A small planchet flaw is seen 
on the reverse as so often on this type, though this is minor and not exceedingly distracting.
€10,000-€12,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: H. H. J. Lynge Collection (Copenhagen - 1899) Lot # 283.

========== PAGE 37 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 13
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Extremely Rare One Y ear Silver Gulden with Attractive Tone
1006
DENMARK. Silver Gulden (Taler), 1545. Flensburg Mint. Christian III. NGC VF-35.  Dav-8236; Hede-
16; Sieg-46; Schou-1; Bruun-4299. Weight: 28.49 gms. Mintmaster: Jørgen Degener. EXCESSIVELY RARE 
one-year type with a lovely iridescent toning and a most impressive pedigree. The portrait is clearly inspired 
by the works of the German artist Jacob Binck who was appointed painter to king Christian, and might in 
fact be his work.
The highly impressive pedigree includes some of the most famous Scandinavian collectors of all times: August 
Christian Mohr (1775-1845), the Norwegian war commissary, merchant, and Neapolitan consul; major general 
Christoph Daniel von Kreber (1755-1840); printer Carl Friedrich Schubart (1759-1830) and merchant; Peter 
von Hemmert (1734-1810).
€40,000-€60,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: August Christian Mohr (Copenhagen - 1847) Lot # 2233.
Ex: C. D. von Kreber (Copenhagen - 1841) Lot # 1113.
Ex: C. F. Schubart (Copenhagen - 1831) Lot # 356.
Ex: Peter v. Hemmert (Copenhagen - 1807) Lot # 280.

========== PAGE 38 ==========

Page 14 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Impressive and Stately Silver Gulden with Deep Color
1007
DENMARK. Silver Gulden (Taler), 1547. Flensburg Mint. Christian III. NGC EF-40.  Dav-8237; Hede-
19; Sieg-47; Schou-1; Lange-20; Bruun-4319. Weight: 28.37 gms. Mintmaster: Jørgen Kock, the younger. A 
SCARCE Renaissance Taler beautifully toned and well-struck on a nice flan. 
The Royal Flensburg mint was in use for only about 30 years, from the 1540s until 1571, when it was turned into 
a bell foundry.
€7,000-€9,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 39 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 15
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Frederik was born on 1 July 1534 at Haderslevhus Castle, the son of King Christian 
III and Dorothea of Saxe-Lauenburg, and acceded to the throne of Denmark-Nor-
way upon the death of his father in 1559. He inherited a relatively stable and pros-
perous kingdom, and immediately set his sights upon regaining Dithmarschen, a 
region in Schleswig to which he had strong ancestral ties, in a relatively quick and 
painless victory for the Danish kingdom.
The major conflict that dominated Frederik II’s reign was the war with the Swed-
ish, called the Northern Seven Y ears’ War, which came to a head in 1563. For seven 
years the war marched on, with battles and skirmishes fought on land and at sea. 
Costs were rising, attrition was high, and by 1565 no significant gains had been 
made. It dragged on until the Treaty of Szczecin was signed in 1570, where no ter-
ritories changed hands and has been described as a stalemate. 
Frederik II went on to reign for 18 more years following the Treaty of Szczecin, and 
Denmark enjoyed a period of economic growth and general affluence. After the 
economy recovered from the Seven Y ears’ War, Frederik increased expenditures 
for the Danish maritime fleet and developed the Kongevej, first national network 
of roads.
In order to quickly produce large quantities of coins to finance the Northern Seven Y ears’ War, Frederik took to the 
minting primitive and debased so-called klippinge (Klippes) struck on square and irregular planchets. These Klippes 
were held in such low esteem by the population that the king was forced to erect gallows around the country threat-
ening to hang anyone who refused to accept the king’s coins at face value.
Frederik found that the cost to produce the large Dalers was prohibitive, and though some were privately struck 
(with the king’s permission) in 1560 and 1563, no official Dalers were stuck until the war was over and he was able to 
recoup the Swedish ransom money for the city of Älvsborg as stipulated by the Treaty of Szczecin. 
(REIGNED 1559-1588)
Frederik II by 
Hans Knieper (?-1587)
The coronation of Frederik II.
FREDERIK II


========== PAGE 40 ==========

Page 16 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Beautiful Goldgulden Klippe with
Only About Three Examples in Private Hands
1008
DENMARK. Goldgulden (Rhinsk Gulden) Klippe, 1563. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik II. NGC AU-55.  
Fr-19; Hede-3; Sieg-23; Schou-3; Bruun-4421. Weight: 3.23 gms. Mintmaster and engraver: Johan of Vilna. 
Of the original mintage of 2,259 examples, only a handful is still in existence, with about three in private 
hands. Exceptionally well-struck on a broad an even flan. 
Struck from gold provided by the king’s brother-in-law, August, Elector of Saxony, in order to finance the Danish 
war efforts in the Northern Seven Years’ War, 1563-1570.
€15,000-€18,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 41 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 17
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Handsome Ducat Klippe with Bold Uncirculated Details
1009
DENMARK. Ducat Klippe, 1564. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik II. NGC Unc Details—Cleaned.  Fr-22; 
Hede-4; Sieg-28; Schou-1; Bruun-4486. Weight: 3.51 gms. Minted by Hans Köppelin and Lauritz Hammer. 
Mintage: 1,399. EXTREMELY RARE, nicely-centered and clearly struck, with only limited signs of the noted 
cleaning. This is the first proper Ducat struck in Denmark. Although Ducats continued to be struck on a 
regular basis until 1802, this is the only one bearing a denomination (DOGKATE). 
Presumably struck in the naval anchor forge on Bremerholm next to the royal castle. In 1619 the forge was turned 
into Holmens Church, which still stands today.
€12,000-€15,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 42 ==========

Page 18 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Christian IV was born in 1577 at Frederiksborg Castle in Denmark, the third child 
and eldest son of King Frederik II of Denmark–Norway and Sofie of Mecklenburg-
Schwerin. Christian acceded to the throne upon the death of his father at the young 
age of 10, thus beginning a reign of nearly sixty years, the longest of any Scandi -
navian monarch to date. Initially ruling with a regency council in place, in 1596 at 
the age of 19 he was crowned King of Denmark-Norway and in 1597, he married 
Anne Catherine of Brandenburg. Christian IV is often described as one of the most 
popular monarchs in Danish history.
Christian IV was an ambitious man, and with a reign that spanned nearly six de -
cades, the list of exploits is long. He oversaw the expansion of the Danish navy, 
founded several merchant cities, and further developed Denmark-Norway’s over-
seas trade. Looking abroad for income, he sent a series of expeditions to Greenland 
over the course of two years beginning in 1605 with the aim of locating the East -
ern Norse Settlement and establishing authority over Greenland. These ultimately 
proved unsuccessful, as did the expedition to North America in 1619 in search of 
the Northwest Passage. 
The formation of the Danish East India Company in 1616 and the subsequent ex-
pedition to Ceylon in 1618 to establish a colony there had mixed results – while no colony was established in Ceylon 
itself, negotiations led to the establishment of the first trading post (Fort Dansborg) on the south coast of India in 
the town of Tranquebar.
Christian IV also set his sights on reviving the fight against Sweden, this time for control of the Baltic Sea and the 
trade routes there. In a war that was known as the Kalmar War, Christian’s might proved superior, though the Treaty 
of Knäred (1613) saw both sides’ conquests made during the war returned. 
Christian’s reign is also marked by the Danish involvement in the Thirty Y ears’ War. The Thirty Y ears’ War originally 
began in 1618 as a dynastic dispute when Emperor Ferdinand II was deposed as king of Bohemia and replaced by 
the protestant Frederik V of the Palatinate. The ensuing crisis ballooned into one of the longest and most destructive 
conflicts in European history. Fought primarily in Central Europe, casualty estimates range from 4.5 to 8 million 
souls as more than a dozen entities joined the fray. 
Christian IV’s aim was to shore up his position in Germany and to protect his interests in the Baltic Sea against the 
ever-present Swedish threat. As the war raged on and Denmark-Norway suffered setbacks, Christian began to fear 
the expansion of German power in the Baltic; he forged an alliance with the Swedish King Gustavus Adolphus who, 
while not usually a supporter of Denmark-Norway, also feared the rise of German power so close to home. The alli-
ance proved fruitful and was able to see Denmark-Norway through the worst of her difficulties. Christian IV reached 
a peace with the Emperor in 1629 with the signing of the Treaty of Lübeck—the treaty ensured no loss of territory for 
Denmark-Norway and barred her from any further intervention in the war. This conveniently precluded Denmark-
Norway from assisting Sweden in any way when they formally entered the war in 1630, a situation Christian IV had 
likely anticipated and used as a bargaining tool with the Holy Roman Empire during their negotiations.
Embittered by his unsuccessful ventures during the Thirty Y ears’ War but scarcely able to afford any further military 
incursions, Christian continued to vex Sweden by raising the Sound Dues (maritime tolls in the Øresund) nine times 
in the next ten years, which served to infuriate the Dutch as well. By 1643, Christian IV was at war with Sweden. 
The conflict (which became known as the Torstenson War) was over by 1645, when Denmark was overwhelmed by 
the combined efforts of Sweden and the Dutch. The Treaty of Brömsebro, brokered by France and the Netherlands, 
was signed in February 1645, and while concessions were made by both sides, it was clear that Christian IV had lost 
control of the Baltic.
For the balance of his time in power, it seems that Christian IV remained bitterly frustrated and embroiled in various 
disputes with his noble council, which was under the leadership of his son-in-law Corfitz Ulfeldt. Despite his less 
than stellar military ventures, he remains one of the most enduringly popular monarchs in Danish history. 
(REIGNED 1588-1648)
Christian IV by 
Pieter Isaacsz (1569–1625)
CHRISTIAN IV

========== PAGE 43 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 19
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Coinage under Christian IV was prolific, as one might expect from a king who 
reigned for 59 years. The early years of his reign saw the minting of mostly small 
coins on which he could make a profit; this was used mostly for building purposes. 
Several coins were struck with express purposes in mind. In 1608, “Lion Dalers, ” 
closely modeled on the Dutch Leeuwendaalder, were struck for trade with the 
Netherlands. In 1618 Christian IV introduced a magnificent large silver coin, the 
Krone, likely of his own design and an obvious imitation of the newly issued Eng-
lish crown and half-crown. This new type was intended to play a vital role in both 
national and international trade, but as its silver content was considerably lower 
than that of one and a half Speciedaler, the government was quickly compelled to 
lower its official rate. The last large size Krone was struck in 1624, and following 
the monetary reform in 1625 by the Council of the Realm, the hitherto Half Krone 
would be rechristened as the Krone.
The Denning (an exact copy of the Russian Dengi struck for trading with the Fin-
mark) was struck in 1619, the Piaster in 1624, and “Horseman Pennings” some -
time after the mint had been established at Gluckstadt in 1616. 
In 1625, the Council of the Realm passed a decree that fixed the official value of 
the Daler (6 Marks or 96 Skillings) and the Krone (4 Marks or 64 Skillings), which 
remained in effect until 1813.
Many types of spectacular gold coins were struck under Christian IV , like the daz-
zling 1608 3 Goldgulden, or Sovereign, likely inspired by his brother-in-law King 
James I of England’s Unite. Other impressive issues were the 1623 Portugaloser 
(10 Ducats), the Goldguldens, and the “Guldridders” or Rose Nobles struck to 
pay troops during the Kalmar War and the Thirty Y ears’ War. The 1644 Ducat (or 
“Hebrew”) is said to have been sketched by the king himself, who was absolutely 
incensed by the invasion of the Swedish in 1643; the legend JUSTUS JEHOV A JU-
DEX (The Lord is a Righteous Judge) serves to underline this frustration as well as 
invoke divine assistance in his upcoming confrontation against Sweden. 
Christian IV was generally regarded as an energetic king who was passionate about 
art, music, and architecture, and his desire to create a lasting legacy in the form of 
beautiful coinage is unmistakable.
Lot 1021
Lot 1022
Lot 1050
Coronation of Christian IV , 1596.


========== PAGE 44 ==========

Page 20 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Wholesome Speciedaler Featuring Christian IV in a Ruff
1010
DENMARK. Speciedaler (Prinsens Daler), 1590. Christian IV . NGC EF-40.  Dav-8230; Hede-43; Sieg-
93; Schou-1; Bruun-4594. Weight: 29.04 gms. A choice, nicely toned and highly detailed example of the  
RARE so-called “prinsedaler” (Prince Taler), which was struck on application from Gyrvhild Fadersdatter 
and Peder Brahe. The 3/4 profile portrait of the only 13 year old king wearing a ruff is very unusual in Danish 
numismatics but seems to be copied after a portrait by Hans Knieper, still in the Royal collection at Rosenborg 
Castle in Copenhagen. The surfaces are yet attractive, with a steely brilliance and light and consistent wear. 
Bruun bought this coin at the estate auction of the wealthy pharmacist, inventor and industrialist Alfred Nicolai 
Benzon (1823-1884). Although Benzon’s enormous collection of more than 11,000 coins abounds with costly 
rarities like the present, it is clear that he, like Bruun, also had a keen eye for obscure varieties of minor coins.
€10,000-€14,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Alfred Benzon (Copenhagen - 1887) Lot # 202.

========== PAGE 45 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 21
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Only One Other Example Known to Exist and Permanently Impounded
1011
DENMARK. 1/4 Portugaloser (2-1/2 Ducats), 1593. Haderslev Mint; mm: Crescent. Christian IV . 
NGC AU Details—Bent. Fr-64; Hede-7B; Sieg-156.2; Schou 2; Harck-8.2; Bruun-4601. Weight: 8.75 gms. 
Mintmaster: Andreas Metzner. Only two examples known to exist, the present and the one in the National 
Museum of Denmark. Although the flan is slightly wavy, the overall condition is appealing with exquisite 
details and traces of original luster. 
This interesting and otherwise completely unobtainable issue was struck on the orders of the dowager queen 
Sophia on behalf of her son, who was only 16 at the time and had not yet been crowned. The design is a 
relatively close copy of the original Portuguese gold coins that gave their name to this popular trade coin.
Before entering the collection of count Bille-Brahe, it was owned by Peter Frederik Suhm (1728-1798). Suhm 
was out of a Danish noble family and a career at court would have been the obvious choice. He was however 
keenly interested in history and studied at the University of Copenhagen where he was fortunate enough to have 
the famous author, Ludvig Holberg as a teacher. He went on to write a number of important historical works 
and became chairman of the Danish Academy of Sciences. He was also a phenomenal book collector and his 
collection of about 100,000 books are now in the Danish Royal Library.
€50,000-€80,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: P . F. Suhm Collection (Copenhagen - 1800) Lot # 39.

========== PAGE 46 ==========

Page 22 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Pleasingly Detailed Extremely Rare Goldgulden from the Haderslev Mint
1012
DENMARK. Goldgulden (Ungersk Gylden), 1593. Haderslev Mint; mm: Crescent. Christian IV . NGC 
AU Details—Cleaned. Fr-32; Hede-8B; Sieg-154.2; Schou-3; Harck-9; Bruun-4602. Weight: 3.45 gms. 
Mintmaster: Andreas Metzner. EXTREMELY RARE and quite presentable, with the noted cleaning being 
limited. Struck for the dowager queen, Sophia. 
The engraver copied the design of the Hungarian model too closely when he showed the elected king Christian 
wearing a crown although he would not actually be crowned until three years later.
€12,000-€16,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Joh. G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 449 in 
his collection.

========== PAGE 47 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 23
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
A Striking Example of this Rare Early Portrait Speciedaler
Thought to be a Commemorative Type for the King’s Coronation
1013
DENMARK. Speciedaler, 1596. Copenhagen Mint. Christian IV . NGC AU-55+. Dav-8231; Hede-44; Sieg-
94; Schou-3; Bruun-4623. Weight: 28.86 gms. Engraved by Johan Post. A spectacular example shimmering 
with golden tones. Quite RARE, it is one of only a handful of examples to appear in public auction over the 
past several decades and is not surprisingly the only example to have been certified by NGC or PCGS.
This type was presumably struck for the coronation of the king on August 29th 1596.
€25,000-€35,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 48 ==========

Page 24 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Minted on the Occasion of the
King’s Wedding to Anna Catherine of Brandenburg
1014
DENMARK. 2 Speciedaler, 1597. Copenhagen Mint. Christian IV . NGC MS-61. Dav-8233; Hede-47; Sieg-
97.1; Schou-1; Bruun-4631. Weight: 57.46 gms. Engraved by Nicolaus Schwabe. Bright luster and extraordinary 
details, paired with limited handling, combine to make this example the best in private ownership. This 
EXTREMELY RARE type was struck on the occasion of the king’s wedding to Anna Catherine, the daughter 
of Margrave Friedrich of Brandenburg on the 27th of November 1597.
€20,000-€25,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Aug. K. Krautwald (Likely by Private Sale - 1916).

========== PAGE 49 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 25
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Magnificent Enthroned Speciedaler of Christian IV
1015
DENMARK. Speciedaler, 1603. Copenhagen Mint. Christian IV . NGC AU-53. KM-17; Dav-3511; Hede-
49; Sieg-98; Schou-5; Bruun-4647. Weight: 27.29 gms. Engraved by Nicolaus Schwabe. EXCESSIVELY 
RARE with only three known in private hands. The technical grade assigned seems somewhat conservative 
as this example is impressively detailed from center to edge with superb tone and evident luster in the fields, 
particularly on the reverse — in fact, it is one of the most beautifully preserved Talers from the early reign of 
Christian IV in existence across all types. Over the canopy above the throne can be seen the latin inscription: 
VIV AT ET V ALEAT (“May he live and be strong”).
€40,000-€60,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Alfred Benzon Collection (Copenhagen - 1887) Lot # 225.

========== PAGE 50 ==========

Page 26 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Bright Speciedaler Mule Produced with Two Reverse Dies
1016
DENMARK. Speciedaler, MDCIII (1603). Copenhagen Mint. Christian IV . NGC MS-61.  KM-19; 
Dav-3512; Hede-51; Sieg-100; Schou-6; Bruun-4648. Weight: 27.44 gms. Engraved by Nicolaus Schwabe. 
A fascinating and  VERY RARE mule striking of two reverse dies and by far the best in private hands. 
Wonderfully toned and an astounding combination of rarity and beauty.
€35,000-€45,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 51 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 27
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
From an Original Mintage of Only 143 Examples
1017
DENMARK. 6 Daler Klippe, 1604. Christian IV . NGC AU-55. Fr-45; KM-26; Hede-11; Sieg-147; Schou-2; 
Bruun-4667. Weight: 13.07 gms. Minted by Nicolaus Schwabe in only 143 examples. Unusually nicely 
struck and  EXCESSIVELY RARE. At the time the value of 6 Daler corresponded to 3.5 Ducats (Hungarian 
Guldens). A few contact marks do not detract from the rarity nor the beauty of this fascinating Klippe.
€30,000-€40,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 52 ==========

Page 28 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
A Very Rare Klippe Struck in 4 Daler Weight
1018
DENMARK. 4 Daler Klippe, 1604. Christian IV . NGC AU Details—Tooled. Fr-46; KM-25; Hede-12; Sieg-
146; Schou-5; Bruun-4670. Weight: 9.59 gms. Minted by Nicolaus Schwabe in only 588 examples.  VERY 
RARE with only light smoothing in the fields around the portrait accounting for the designation by NGC, 
but very well-struck with clear details.
€6,000-€8,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 476 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 53 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 29
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Extremely Rare “Hungarian” Ducat with Rich Golden Color
1019
DENMARK. Goldgulden (Ungersk Gylden), 1604. Christian IV . NGC AU-53. Fr-Unlisted; KM-Unlisted; 
Hede-14; Sieg-137.2; Schou 12; Bruun-4673; Weight: 3.44 gms. Mintmaster: Nicolaus Schwabe. An  
EXTREMELY RARE type, these “Hungarian” Guldens continued to be struck as “Ducats” until 1802 with 
the same weight and fineness. Somewhat unevenly struck but with a rich golden toning and only limited signs 
of actual handling.
€12,000-€15,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Joh. G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 477 in 
his collection.

========== PAGE 54 ==========

Page 30 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L. E. Bruun Collection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
One of Two Known
The Other Held by the National Museum of Denmark
1020
DENMARK. 2 Goldgulden (2 Ungersk Gylden), 1608. Christian IV . NGC AU Details—Tooled.  Fr-36; 
KM-46; Hede-18; Sieg-141; Schou-2; Bruun-4746. Weight: 6.94 gms. Mintmaster: Nicolaus Schwabe. One of 
only two known examples, the other being in the National Museum of Denmark. The wonderful design and 
the rarity (UNIQUE in private hands), eclipses the tooled surfaces noted by NGC. Details are generally sharp, 
with limited actual circulation and a generally pleasing eye appeal.
€25,000-€40,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: L. Christian Nielsen Collection (Copenhagen - 1878) Lot # 12.

========== PAGE 55 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 31
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00 PM CEST / 5:00 AM PT
The Bille-Brahe family, one of the most important noble families in the his -
tory of Denmark, can be traced to the Middle Ages. The family name arose 
from a merger of the two noble families Bille and Brahe. There have been 
many prominent members of the family over the years, but the most famous 
by far is world-renowned astronomer Tycho Brahe (1546-1601), son of Otto 
Brahe and Beate Clausdatter Bille. 
The most significant collector in the Bille-Brahe family was Count Preben 
Bille-Brahe (1773-1857), who is seen here with his second wife, Johanne Car-
oline Wilhelmine b. Falbe.
They were portrayed in 1817 by C.W . Eckersberg, one of Denmark’s most tal-
ented painters from the time art historians refer to as Denmark’s golden age. It 
shows a tanned man who was out on the farm during the day and in the eve-
ning sat with a book in his hand, together with his spouse, who, of course, was 
occupied with her needlework. The painting can be seen at the Ny Carlsberg 
Glyptotek in Copenhagen.
As a young man, Preben Bille-Brahe trained as an officer in the horse guard, 
after which (as the times dictated), he set off on a Grand Tour, which led him 
to Italy. It was there his great interest in art and history, so exquisitely reflected in his coin collection, was truly awak-
ened. He also visited the British Isles to study agriculture to benefit the agricultural exploitation of the family estate, 
Hvedholm. In 1798, the Countship of Brahesminde was established by uniting the lands from Hvedholm, Damsbo, 
Stensgård and Østrupgård as well as the two islands Avernakø and Drejø. Preben Bille-Brahe was considered both a 
skilled and humane estate administrator, particularly active in improving the living conditions of small-scale work-
ers, village teachers, etc. He not only had humanistic interests, but was also generally interested in science; it is by no 
means accidental that Eckersberg let Bille-Brahe hold a book in his hand. The count’s personal library at Hvedholm 
was eagerly added to, but he also supported the creation of a public library on Funen. In 1840 he received the Grand 
Cross of the Order of Dannebrog and in 1841 he was appointed Privy Councilor to the court. 
His son, diplomat Henrik Bille-Brahe (1798-1875) and grandson, Preben Charles Bille-Brahe Selby (1842-1918) 
continued to increase the collection. But at the disentailing of the estate in 1920, the countship’s collection held in 
Hvedholm Manor had to be disposed of in favor of the Treasury. The collection was valued at DKK 175,000 by Julius 
W . Wilcke and H. H. Schou, who prepared the main 
part of the L. E. Bruun catalog. With the intervention 
of Georg Galster (who was head of the coin cabinet in 
the National Museum, to which L. E. Bruun’s collection 
would be bequeathed in the unlikely event that the col-
lection held here should be destroyed or stolen within 
the next 100 years), it was decided to accept Bruun’s 
bid of DKK 140,000, and the deal was completed on 21 
October, 1922. 
Many of the most sublime pieces in L. E. Bruun’s collec-
tion come from the collection of the Countship of Bra-
hesminde, and there is no doubt that many specimens 
among the 19th century coins went straight from the 
Mint into this collection. The Bille-Brahe family’s close 
relationship with other Danish noble families, where 
exceptional pieces had been treasured for generations, 
enabled them to acquire coins that would otherwise 
not have been available to collectors. 
THE COLLECTION OF
THE COUNTSHIP OF BRAHESMINDE
Count Preben Bille-Brahe with his second 
wife, Johanne Caroline Wilhelmine b. Falbe.
Aerial view of Hvedholm Castle.

========== PAGE 56 ==========

Page 32 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 57 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 33
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Magnificent Danish Renaissance Sovereign of Christian IV
Easily the Finest in Private Hands
1021
DENMARK. Sovereign, 1608. Elsinore Mint. Christian IV . NGC MS-62. Fr-35; KM-A47; Hede-19; Sieg-
144; Schou-1; Bruun-4773. Weight: 10.02 gms. Mintmaster: Hans Flemming. One of the most imposing from 
the whole series of Danish Renaissance coinage, this dazzling example with full luster was perfectly struck 
on an even flan and is easily the best of the three known examples in private collections. Publicly owned 
examples are to be found in Copenhagen, Oslo, Stockholm, Lund and St. Petersburg. 
Christian IV visited England in 1606 where he was probably inspired by his brother-in-law James I’s new coin 
reform to instigate the mintage of Danish “Sovereigns, ” which were of the same approximate weight and fineness 
as the new British Unites.
€200,000-€300,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Frederik Christian Bech (Copenhagen - 1906) Lot # 153.
The reference to Devegge 599 in the 1925 Bruun catalog must be a mistake.

========== PAGE 58 ==========

Page 34 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 59 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 35
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Alluringly Toned Rose Noble Featuring a War Elephant
1022
DENMARK. Rose Noble, 1611. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Clover. Christian IV . NGC AU-58★. Fr-
48; KM-51; Hede-23A; Sieg-143.1; Schou-1; Bruun-4840. Weight: 8.91 gms. Mintmaster: Nicolaus Schwabe. 
A warm reddish toning along the rim further enhances this ravishing example. Only lightly circulated, with 
tremendous eye appeal as evidenced by the star designation NGC has bestowed on this example. 
The inspiration for this beautiful, amusing and  VERY RARE type came from the British Rose Nobles that 
were widely used in the international trade. In the contemporary official accounts the type is referred to as a 
“Guldridder” from the Dutch, “gouden rijder” .
€90,000-€130,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Joh. G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 545 
in his collection and illustrated on page 203.

========== PAGE 60 ==========

Page 36 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Alluring Mint State 1/2 Rose Noble of the Highest Rarity
1023
DENMARK. 1/2 Rose Noble, 1611. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Clover. Christian IV . NGC MS-60. Fr-
49; KM-50.1; Hede-24A; Sieg-142.1; Schou 6; Bruun-4843. Weight: 4.38 gms. Mintmaster: Nicolaus Schwabe. 
A spectacular example of this  EXCESSIVELY RARE one year type boasting a typical early portrait of the 
king with a tall, open crown, as a closed crown was not used before 1624. No wear appears atop the designs, 
with bright brilliance retained in the fields. A touch of strike doubling is noted, particularly along the revese 
legends.
€50,000-€80,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 546 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 61 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 37
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Magnificently Toned and Splendidly Detailed Example
1024
DENMARK. Speciedaler, 1618. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Clover. Christian IV . NGC MS-62. KM-44; 
Dav-3514; Hede-53C; Sieg-102.3; Schou-2; Bruun-5001. Weight: 28.60 gms. Mintmaster: Nicolaus Schwabe. 
An absolutely brilliant example with a nice cabinet toning and splendid details throughout. A tremendous 
Speciedaler preserved at a splendid Mint State level that is quite uncommon.
€3,000-€5,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 598 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 62 ==========

Page 38 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Beautiful Corona Danica Featuring Striking Design Elements
1025
DENMARK. 2 Krone, 1618. Elsinore Mint; Privy Mark: Crossed Clubs. Christian IV . NGC MS-61. KM-
61.1; Dav-3516; Hede-105B; Sieg-87.6; Schou-25; Bruun-5040. Weight: 37.85 gms. Mintmaster: Johan Post. A  
nicely toned and highly lustrous example, boldly struck with an insignificant die-break at the lower reverse.
This beautiful broad Krone (Corona Danica) is in many ways the archetypical coin of Christian IV . The 
denomination, inspired by the English Crown, was introduced in 1618 with the intention that it should pass 
for 1-½ Speciedaler but the king had arranged for the silver to be debased to pocket a sum for his own slender 
purse. This was of course quickly found out and the foreign merchants refused to accept these new “Kroner” at 
face value. 
Among the public, the king’s abbreviated royal motto, RFP (Regnat Firmat Pietas / “Justice strengthens the 
realms”) was soon interpreted as R(iget) F(attes) P(enge) (“The kingdom is in want of money”).
€5,000-€6,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 63 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 39
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Gold Krone with No Other Known Examples in Private Hands
1026
DENMARK. Gold Krone, 1619. Copenhagen Mint. Christian IV . NGC AU-58. Fr-55; KM-73; Hede-26A; 
Sieg-133.1; Schou 4; Bruun-5069. Weight: 2.95 gms. Mintmaster: Nicolaus Schwabe. Of the three registered 
examples this lovely piece is UNIQUE in private hands. The luster is bright and brilliant, with a generally 
sharp strike that only shows limited weakness. Entirely appealing and deserving of much attention from the 
numerous specialists seeking out an example of this type. 
When the new silver Krone was introduced in 1618 it was at the same time decided that an issue with the same 
value (1-1/2 Speciedaler) should also be minted in gold. When the value of the silver Kroner were reduced to 
1-1/3 Speciedaler, the gold issues kept their value. All the different denominations minted to this new monetary 
standard had a crown (krone) as their main design.
€20,000-€30,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 64 ==========

Page 40 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Boldly Struck and Brightly Lustered Gold 1/2 Krone
1027
DENMARK. Gold 1/2 Krone, 1619. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Clover. Christian IV . NGC MS-63. 
Fr-56; KM-72; Hede-27; Sieg-132; Schou-6; Bruun-5070. Weight: 1.44 gms. Mintmaster: Nicolaus Schwabe. 
A stunningly brilliant and brightly lustrous 1/2 Krone with eye catching tone that accompanies the surfaces. 
A minute striking void is noted within the crown design, however this is relatively minor in the scope of the 
overall appeal. A RARE type, and undoubtedly among the finest extant. 
The value of the 1/2 Krone denomination was equivalent to 3/4 Speciedaler.
€8,000-€12,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Alfred Benzon Collection (Copenhagen - 5/1887) Lot # 396.

========== PAGE 65 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 41
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Extremely Rare 2 Krone in Gold
1028
DENMARK. Gold 2 Krone, 1619. Elsinore Mint; Privy Mark: Crossed Clubs. Christian IV . NGC MS-62. 
Fr-54; KM-74.1; Hede-25B; Sieg-134.2; Schou-1; Bruun-5109. Weight: 5.94 gms. Mintmaster: Johan Post. An  
EXCEEDINGLY RARE type and the best of the only three to four examples in private hands, presenting both 
considerable amounts of luster and a warm gold toning. Nicely struck and an example certainly not lacking 
for beauty.
€20,000-€30,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 627 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 66 ==========

Page 42 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 67 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 43
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Powerfully Struck Portugaloser with
Assayer’s “Melting Pot” Countermark
One of Only Four Believed to Have Survived
Considered Unique in Private Hands
1029
DENMARK. Portugaloser (10 Ducats), 1623. Gluckstadt Mint; Assayer’s Mark: Melting Pot. Christian 
IV . NGC AU-53. Fr-66; KM-cf. 15 (silver); Hede-156; Sieg-cf.183.1 (silver); Schou-3; Bruun-5326. Weight: 
34.71 gms. Mintmaster: Albert Dionis. Of the mere 237 examples originally minted, only four are believed to 
have survived. Namely two in the National Museum of Denmark, one in the Hermitage, St. Petersburg, and 
the present example, which is the only one in private hands. A minor edge split does not deter from the fact 
that this is an absolutely gorgeous example of one of the most spectacular issues from Christian IV’s entire 
reign.
Dionis’ mintmark, the melting pot, was also used on the reverse as a countermark or rather an official assayer’s 
mark guaranteeing the purity of the gold. The beautiful reverse motif showing Lady Luck (Fortuna) on a globe is 
an allegory on the name of the mint.
€200,000-€300,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 68 ==========

Page 44 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Choice Mint State Speciedaler with Entrancing Reverse Design
1030
DENMARK. Speciedaler, 1623. Gluckstadt Mint. Christian IV . NGC MS-63. KM-15; Dav-3668; Hede-156; 
Sieg-183.1; Schou-16; Lange-34; Bruun-5332. Weight: 29.07 gms. Mintmaster: Albert Dionis. A stunningly 
choice example of this popular type, with surfaces that have acquired a rather pleasant tone and have largely 
escaped forms of major handling. For preciseness, a few small areas with doubling or incompleteness of strike 
are noted, particularly at the date, but the overall depiction is quite satisfactory.
The city of Glückstadt (literally: City of luck) had been founded by Christian IV only seven years earlier, in 1616. 
The idea was to creative a Danish rival to the important City of Hamburg. Promising settlers tax exemption 
and, radically for the time, freedom of religion, the city soon flourished, becoming the home of the first Jewish 
settlers in Denmark. Many of the coins struck at Glückstadt depict Lady Luck standing on a globe, as does this 
astounding piece.
€4,000-€6,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: August K. Krautwald (Private Sale - 1916).

========== PAGE 69 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 45
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Extremely Rare 4 Speciedaler Struck with Norwegian Silver
1031
DENMARK. 4 Speciedaler, 1624. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Clover. Christian IV . NGC EF Details—
Reverse Graffiti.  KM-79; Dav-3521; Hede-58; Sieg-110; Schou-1; Bruun-5364. Weight: 116.49 gms. 
Mintmaster: Nicolaus Schwabe (NS). A truly majestic coin struck with the regular dies for a Speciedaler but 
four times as thick, the heft and importance of the piece is evident as soon as one picks it up. The details are 
commendable, with limited signs of handling, being constrained to only the highest elements of the design. 
The reverse graffiti designation is attributable to a small patch inside the 13 interlocking shields. This minor 
fault should have little to no bearing on the overall desirability of the piece, given the splendid RARITY and 
desirability of this special strike. 
In an entry of March 31st the king wrote in one of his diaries that he had received 140 Speciedalers from Schwabe 
which he had struck from Norwegian silver. Even though there might have been silver from other sources in the 
alloy there can be little doubt that the beautiful 1624-series is the first of the Danish/Norwegian coins to be struck 
from silver actually mined at Kongsberg Silver Works which was founded shortly after finding silver ores in the 
cliffs in the summer of 1623.
€25,000-€35,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.


========== PAGE 70 ==========

Page 46 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Appealing Nearly-Choice Speciedaler with Charming Luster Throughout
1032
DENMARK. Speciedaler, 1624. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Clover. Christian IV . NGC MS-62. KM-
101; Dav-3524; Hede-55A; Sieg-107.1; Schou-14; Bruun-5369. Weight: 28.86 gms. Mintmaster: Nicolaus 
Schwabe (NS). Although this is not a rare coin, this example is so stunning, that it should be seen to be 
believed. The surfaces display a vivid luster, with bright details and touches of handsome luster thorughout. 
For the first time, the king is shown wearing a closed crown adding an interesting historical note.
€2,000-€3,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 71 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 47
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Nicely Detailed Example of a Type Known
As the “First Danish Colonial Coin”
1033
DENMARK. Piaster, 1624. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Clover. Christian IV . NGC AU Details—
Cleaned. KM-117; Dav-3520; Hede-66; Sieg-90; Schou-27; Bruun-5372. Weight: 26.98 gms. Mintmaster: 
Nicolaus Schwabe. A mild wiping doesn’t deter from the fact that this very detailed example is one of the 
best of the few privately owned. This highly interesting and coveted Piaster (Piastre, Peso) was struck at the 
request and expense of The Danish East Indian Company as a trade coin and is often referred to as the first 
Danish colonial coin. The religious reverse legend, BENEDICTIO DOMINI DIVITES FACIT (“Put your 
trust in God and you will be rewarded”) refers to the discovery of silver in the mountains of Norway.
€40,000-€50,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Peter v. Hemmert Collection (Copenhagen - 2/1807) Lot # 518.

========== PAGE 72 ==========

Page 48 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Majestic Octagonal Klippe
Unique in Weight and Shape
1034
DENMARK. Octagonal Speciedaler Klippe, 1624. Gluckstadt Mint. Christian IV . NGC AU-53. KM-Pn7; 
cf. Dav-3668; Hede-159F; cf. Sieg-183.1; Schou-13; Bruun-5439. Weight: 39.91 gms. Mintmaster: Albert 
Dionis. A literally majestic example of this UNIQUE and highly interesting overweight trial struck on an 
octagonal flan. A warm and delicate cabinet toning enhances the charming design of the king clad in armor 
and the nude Roman goddess of fortune and personification of luck, Fortuna, standing on a globe and waving 
a banner. 
Only five other trials struck with Taler dies exist of which four are in the National Museum of Denmark. All 
are individually unique as to weight and shape, so this is a highly singular opportunity to acquire an important 
numismatic treasure of great beauty and exceptional shape.
This piece was one of Johan Guildal’s favorite pieces and is one of the very few that was reproduced in the 1920 
catalog that documented his expansive collection (p. 211).
€40,000-€60,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 749 
in his collection.
Presumably acquired by Eugen Merzbacher, Coin Dealer in Munich, in 1885.

========== PAGE 73 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 49
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Best of Only Two in Private Hands
1035
DENMARK. Ducat, 1627. Wolfenbüttel Mint. Christian IV . NGC EF-45. Fr-58; KM-72; Hede-1B; Sieg-
198.2; Schou-3; Aagaard-T2; Bruun-5528. Weight: 3.46 gms. Struck for count Philipp Reinhard von Solms-
Hohensolms (1613 - 1635) as viceregent of the Danish King.  EXTREMELY RARE and displaying a nice 
luster with only limited signs of actual handling. Quite lovely and yet attractive for the type. 
Wolffenbüttel in Lower Saxony was controlled by King Christian IV for a brief period during the Thirty-Years-
War. The coinage produced there in his name was made from the gold and silver dinnerware found in the castle. 
Very few of these gold coins have survived to this day.
€25,000-€35,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Frederik C. Bech Collection (Sagførernes Auktioner, Copenhagen 12/1906) Lot # 284.
Ex: Alfred Benzon Collection (Copenhagen - 5/1887) Lot # 609.

========== PAGE 74 ==========

Page 50 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Sharply Detailed Example of this Extremely Rare Type
1036
DENMARK. 2 Guldkrone, 1628. Copenhagen Mint. Christian IV . NGC AU Details—Obverse Rim 
Filed. Fr-Unlisted; KM-111; Hede-28; Sieg-135; Schou-3; Bruun-5541. Weight 5.91 gms. Mintmark: RD.  
EXTREMELY RARE with no examples in public auctions for decades, this Ducat delivers charming eye 
appeal and good strike quality with limited signs of circulation. The noted edge file is visible, though it does 
not intrude too much, and leaves the design wholly unaffected.
€25,000-€35,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 75 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 51
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Beautiful Mint State Example of an Extremely Rare Date
1037
DENMARK. Goldgulden (Rhinsk Gulden), 1628. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Clover. Christian IV . 
NGC MS-62. Fr-43; KM-108; Hede-29; Sieg-136.1; Schou-8; Bruun-5544. Weight: 3.18 gms. Mintmaster: 
Nicolaus Schwabe. An  EXTREMELY RARE date, this entrancing Mint State example delivers bright luster 
with no signs of handling or drawdown. The strike is good, with only limited weakness, and no immediately 
displeasing areas. A tremendous example of this seldom seen date, and one that has nice beauty that matches 
the overall appeal.
€10,000-€15,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 836 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 76 ==========

Page 52 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Handsome Rose Noble Struck
Under the Authority of “The Citizens’ Mint”
1038
DENMARK. Rose Noble, 1629. Copenhagen Mint. Christian IV . NGC AU-53. Fr-48; KM-51; Hede-23B; 
Sieg-143.2; Schou-3; Bruun-5584. Weight: 8.74 gms. A lovely example with a sensitive portrait and charming 
elephant. This highly desirable and  EXCESSIVELY RARE one-year type was struck by “Borgerskabets 
Mønt” (The Citizens’ Mint) consisting of the mintmaster Matthias Clausen, Johan Brahm, and the mayor of 
Copenhagen, Jacob Michelsen. After less than half a year, their right to produce coins was withdrawn.
€50,000-€75,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 849 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 77 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 53
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Beautifully Detailed, Brightly Lustrous
And Very Rare Double Speciedaler
1039
DENMARK. 2 Speciedaler, 1631. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Clover. Christian IV . NGC MS-62. KM-
104; Dav-3523; Hede-56C; Sieg-108.3; Schou-1; Bruun-5607. Weight: 57.91 gms. Mintmaster: Peter Grüner 
(PG).  VERY RARE and most pleasing to look at, this tremendous example delivers bright luster and a 
handsome allotment of charming tone. Nicely struck and altogether quite sharp, we expect much excitement 
for this multiple.
€15,000-€25,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 78 ==========

Page 54 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Richly Toned and Brilliant Speciedaler
1040
DENMARK. Speciedaler, 1634. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Clover. Christian IV . NGC AU-50. KM-
101; Dav-3524; Hede-55C; Sieg-107.3; Schou-4; Bruun-5628. Weight: 28.81 gms. Mintmaster: Peter Grüner 
(PG). An attractive and only modestly circulated Speciedaler, this appealing example delivers rich brilliance, 
with evidence of circulation being seen on the highest design elements. Charming and colorful toning is 
present across the surfaces, being most forceful at the peripheries and in the tucked in areas of the design.
€1,500-€2,500
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 79 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 55
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Pleasingly Detailed Gluckstadt 2 Speciedaler
1041
DENMARK. 2 Speciedaler, 1641. Gluckstadt Mint. Christian IV . NGC AU Details—Reverse Cleaned.  
KM-28; Dav-3669; Hede-164B; Sieg-187.2; Schou-3; Lange-33; Bruun-5638. Weight: 58.34 gms.  Mintmaster: 
Simon Timpfe (ST). Although the reverse has at some point been cleaned it represents remarkably well in 
every way with all details being far superior to what is normally encountered and escaping most evidence of 
circulation. An  EXTREMELY RARE type as a Double Speciedaler, and in comparison with the earlier dates 
from this popular series, Fortuna is rendered with very long and flowing hair.
€20,000-€30,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 80 ==========

Page 56 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Bright and Alluring Nearly Mint Ducat Featuring the Tetragrammaton
A Type Inspired by the King’s Hand-Drawn Depiction
1042
DENMARK. Ducat, 1644. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Poker. Christian IV . NGC AU-58. Fr-39; KM-
141; Hede-33; Sieg-128.1; Schou-4: Aagaard TKG4; Bruun-5686. Weight: 3.47 gms. Mintmaster: Heinrich 
Köhler. Engraver: Hans zum Busch. This attractive Ducat delivers alluring details, and only the lightest 
touches of actual wear on the high design elements. Visually impressive and deserving the attention of many. 
In the middle of the Torstenson War and possibly to invoke the help of God against the Swedes, king Christian 
personally sketched the coin design using the Tetragrammaton (the Hebrew four-letter-name of God) as a key 
element on silver and gold coins struck in Copenhagen, Christiania, and Glückstadt.
€5,000-€7,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Alfred Benzon Collection (Copenhagen - 5/1887) Lot # 736.

========== PAGE 81 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 57
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Alluring Example of a One Y ear Variant
1043
DENMARK. 1/2 Ducat, 1644. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Poker. Christian IV . NGC AU-58. Fr-
40; KM-138; Hede-35; Sieg-124.1; Schou-6; Aagaard-TKG6; Bruun-5687. Weight: 1.80 gms. Mintmaster: 
Heinrich Köhler. Engraver: Hans zum Busch. A beautiful orange hue makes the design particularly stand out 
on this one-year variant where the king has a flower between his legs.
€5,000-€7,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 82 ==========

Page 58 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Nearly Mint State Ducat with Bold Strike
1044
DENMARK. Ducat, 1645. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Poker. Christian IV . NGC AU-58. Fr-39; KM-
141; Hede-33; Sieg-128.2; Schou-3; Aagaard-TKG5; Bruun-5732. Weight: 3.46 gms. Mintmaster: Heinrich 
Köhler. Engraver: Hans zum Busch. Sharply struck on a remarkably even flan with surfaces that present 
attractive color. 
Due to their religious design, the types bearing a Hebrew legend where often used as pendants.
€5,000-€7,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 1008 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 83 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 59
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Superbly Lustrous and Immaculate Mint State 1/2 Ducat
1045
DENMARK. 1/2 Ducat, 1645/4. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Poker. Christian IV . NGC MS-61.  Fr-
40; KM-138; Hede-35; Sieg-124.2; Schou-9; Aagaard-TKG7; Bruun-5736. Weight: 1.73 gms.  Mintmaster: 
Heinrich Köhler. Engraver: Hans zum Busch. An exceptionally attractive example of this  SCARCE and 
coveted type, with bright luster and no immediate signs of handling. Struck with a reverse die from 1644, 
close inspection of the date reveals that a 5 was somewhat crudely added to the die to create this 1645/4 
overdate.
€5,000-€7,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 84 ==========

Page 60 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
About Uncirculated 1/2 Ducat with Appealing Brilliance
1046
DENMARK. 1/2 Ducat, 1647. Copenhagen Mint. Christian IV . NGC AU-58.  Fr-42a; KM-151; Hede-
40; Sieg-126; Schou-4; Bruun-5814. Weight: 1.68 gms. Mintmaster: Heinrich Köhler. Engraver: Hans zum 
Busch. Sharply struck on an unusually even flan and altogether an absolutely charming example with all 
details presenting very well.  EXTREMELY RARE with only a very few privately owned examples. Due to its 
“spectacular” design this type has always ranked among the most coveted of all from the Danish Renaissance. 
The latin inscription, VIDE MIRA DOMI (“Behold the wonders of the Lord”) found below a pair of spectacles 
refers to the gold that was found near Arendal in Norway. 
The king had high hopes for this find and had this highly unusual series of Ducats made from the Norwegian gold 
which was brought to Copenhagen to be refined by the alchemist and goldsmith, Caspar Herbach.
€20,000-€30,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 1060 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 85 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 61
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Attractive and Lightly Handled 1/4 Ducat Featuring Legend in Hebrew
1047
DENMARK. 1/4 Ducat, 1647. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Poker. Christian IV . NGC AU-53. Fr-
41; KM-A143; Hede-36; Sieg-121; Schou-6; Aagaard-TKG8; Bruun-5816. Weight: 0.87 gms.  Mintmaster: 
Heinrich Köhler. Engraver: Hans zum Busch. An excellent example of this  SCARCE date, with light luster 
and only limited signs of drawdown from circulation. A most impressive and immediately engaging specimen.
€3,000-€4,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 86 ==========

Page 62 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Appealing and Handsome Fractional “Spectacles” Ducat
Quite Possibly Unduplicated in Private Hands
1048
DENMARK. 1/4 Ducat, 1647. Copenhagen Mint. Christian IV . NGC AU-50. Fr-60; KM-149; Hede-39; 
Sieg-122; Schou-7; Bruun-5817. Weight: 0.87 gms. Small flan flaws and a somewhat wavy flan aside, a very 
nice example of what seems to be the sole survivor of this amusing type apart from the two in the National 
Museums of Denmark and Norway.
€10,000-€20,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 87 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 63
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Vibrantly Toned and Nearly Mint Christian IV Speciedaler
1049
DENMARK. Speciedaler, 1647. Gluckstadt Mint. Christian IV . NGC AU-58. KM-27; Dav-3670; Hede-
163C; Sieg-186.3; Schou-21; Harck 2.2.2; Lange-41; Bruun-5821. Weight: 28.74 gms. Mintmaster: Jacob 
Schwieger (IS). A highly detailed strike combined with a wonderful iridescent toning over a shimmering 
luster makes this example stand out among others.
€4,000-€6,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: H. H. J. Lynge Collection (Copenhagen - 1899) Lot # 931.
Ex: H. M. Mayntzhusen Collection (Copenhagen - 5/1883) Lot # 649.

========== PAGE 88 ==========

Page 64 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 89 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 65
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Engrossing Portugaloser with  
Finely Engraved and Vividly Struck Details
Among the Most Beautiful of All Danish Coins
1050
DENMARK. Portugaloser (10 Ducats), ND (1604-1607). Copenhagen Mint. Christian IV . NGC AU-58. 
Fr-68; KM-FR#68; Hede-9; Sieg-150; Schou-4; Beskrivelsen 1791-1170; Bruun-5839. Weight: 34.93 gms. 
Mintmaster: Nicolaus Schwabe. A completely breathtaking example, lightly toned, lustrous and perfectly 
struck on an even flan. EXCESSIVELY RARE, with only three in private hands, this literally majestic type 
is easily one of the most desirable of all Danish coins. The other example in private hands struck from these 
dies also used to be in the Bruun collection (bought from Bille-Brahe) but was sold to Spink and Son in 
the auction of duplicates in 1925 (lot 2266) for the huge sum of DKK 3,000, by far the highest price of the 
more than 5,000 coins in the auction. When this example appeared on auction again in November 2000 (TH 
Auction 10, lot 1490) it set a world record for the highest price obtained for a Danish coin at auction (DKK 
550,000).
The flamboyant king had a weakness for gold coins, and it therefore came naturally to him, following the 
Portuguese example but with an independent design, to mint this magnificent gold coin worth a whopping 10 
Ducats. The obverse motif is a sweeping piece of propaganda for the young monarch who already harbored big 
dreams as a field commander. The armor-clad king is depicted with a marshal’s baton atop a rearing horse - the 
classic warrior symbol. To underline the obvious fact that God was on his side, the engraver lets two angels carry 
the Danish crown. In the background a city prospectus can be seen. 
In the personal records of the king, an entry from the 14th of February 1607 notes that Nicolaus Schwabe had 
delivered a number of gold coins including 10 Portugalosers “from the gold I had bought from my mother”. There 
can therefore be little doubt, that it was in fact minted for the king’s personal use.
€150,000-€200,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 90 ==========

Page 66 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Extremely Rare and Nicely Presented Gold Trial Issue
1051
DENMARK. Gold Trial Issue, ND (1607-1608). Christian IV . NGC AU Details—Cleaned.  Fr-52; Hede-
21; Sieg-152.1; Schou-11; JS-236; Bruun-5841. Weight: 8.05 gms. Mintmaster: Nicolaus Schwabe. A ravishing 
example of this charming, unusual and EXCESSIVELY RARE type. The obverse with the characteristic 
hovering crown is closely similar to the one used by Schwabe on the Mark issue from 1606 (Hede-92A). Both 
the flan, the strike, and the size suggest that this is in fact a coin although the weight doesn’t match the weight 
of other gold coins.
Before entering the collection of count Bille-Brahe, this piece was owned by Johan Andreas Ferdinand Wolff 
(1814-1893). Wolff was a bank director (Bikuben), merchant and Danish consul in Manila. His collection was 
cataloged by Peter Hauberg, later to become the managing director of the Royal Coin Cabinet, and sold in 1882.
€25,000-€40,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Johan Andreas Ferdinand Wolff Collection (Copenhagen - 3/1882) Lot # 670.

========== PAGE 91 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 67
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Stunning Near-Choice Double Speciedaler 
Inspired by the German Lösers
1052
DENMARK. 2 Speciedaler, ND (1607-11). Elsinore Mint. Christian IV . NGC MS-62.  KM-147; Dav-
LS529; Hede-63D; Sieg-113.2; Schou-20; Bruun-5846. Weight: 56.36 gms. Mintmaster: Hans Flemming. A 
categorically sublime example, radiant and with meticulous details. This stunning presentation coin, inspired 
by the German Lösers, rather unusually shows the king wearing a feathered hat. 
The mint at Elsinore (Helsingør), the city of Shakespeare’s Hamlet, was only active from 1607 to 1611, in which 
period it was run by the Dutchman, Hans Flemming.
€10,000-€15,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Alfred Benzon Collection (Copenhagen - 5/1887) Lot # 853.

========== PAGE 92 ==========

Page 68 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Handsomely Toned 2 Speciedaler with Only Light Circulation
1053
DENMARK. 2 Speciedaler, ND (ca. 1611)-IH. Copenhagen Mint. Christian IV . NGC AU-55.  KM-
148; Dav-LS533; Hede-64B; Sieg-119.3; Schou-24; Bruun-5849. Weight: 58.00 gms. Mintmaster: Nicolaus 
Schwabe. Engraver: Isaac Henniges (IH). A luminous rainbow toning along the rim enhances the nicely 
struck details and makes this example positively awe-inspiring.
On this stunning presentation piece the king is clad in armor and carries a marshal’s baton as a symbol of his role 
as the supreme commander in the successful Kalmar War against Sweden. These so-called  “breddalere” (“Broad 
Talers”) became so popular that early casts were made to supply the demand for instance to be used in the lid of 
tankards.
This imposing multiple-Taler was formerly in the collection of the entomologist Jørgen Vilhelm Bergsøe (1835-
1911). Following his relocation to Rome, where he became acquainted with Henrik Ibsen,  he became a successful 
novelist and poet. In numismatic circles he is, however, most famous for having written a work on Danish medals 
which is still used as a reference today.
€9,000-€13,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Vilhelm Bergsøe Collection (Copenhagen - 5/1890) Lot # 907.

========== PAGE 93 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 69
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Steely and Stately Nearly Mint Speciedaler
1054
DENMARK. Speciedaler, ND (1596). Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Clover. Christian IV . NGC AU-55. 
Dav-8231; Hede-44; Sieg-94; Schou-31; Bruun-5852. Weight: 28.20 gms. Engraver: Nicolaus Schwabe. One 
of only two known examples, the other being in the National Museum of Denmark. Struck for the king’s 
coronation on the 29th of August 1596. No matter the condition, this would be a “now or never” piece. 
However, the example is truly impeccable, dazzling the viewer with an elegant multicolored toning and a 
forceful portrait.
At his father’s death in 1588, prince Christian was only 10 years old and until 1596 the realm was de facto 
governed by a regency council, led by the chancellor, Niels Kaas. Following his death in 1594 the chairmanship 
passed to Jørgen (George) Rosenkrantz, whose name was used by Shakespeare in Hamlet.
Although the reverse was also used for the variant bearing the date 1596, the portrait side is very different and 
more similar to the type struck for the king’s wedding in 1597. A Clover (trefoil) indicates that the engraver was 
Nicolaus (Nikolaj) Schwabe and that the coin was struck at the Copenhagen Mint in the former convent of St. 
Clare.
€30,000-€40,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: L. Christian Nielsen Collection (Copenhagen - 11/1878) Lot # 1329.

========== PAGE 94 ==========

Page 70 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Frederik III was the second-eldest son of King Christian IV and Anne Catherine of 
Brandenburg, born in 1609 at Haderslevhus Castle in Denmark. Being the second born 
son meant that he was not considered as a potential heir to the throne until the death 
of his older brother Prince Christian in 1647. Upon King Christian IV’s death in 1648, 
Frederik was elected to the throne only after long deliberations by the Council of the 
Realm, who seized the chance to leverage power in their favor by including several 
provisions that curtailed royal prerogative. Throughout Frederik III’s reign, he would 
have an uneasy relationship with the Council and the nobility in general.
Despite the general war-weary sentiment in the country, Frederik III (probably cor -
rectly) identified the accession of Charles X to the Swedish throne as a potential threat 
to Denmark-Norway. While Sweden was preoccupied with fighting a war against Po -
land, Frederik took his chance to right the wrongs of the Treaty of Brömsebro and 
moved against Sweden in January 1658. It was, by all accounts, a stunning failure. The 
Swedes confounded the Danish troops by turning and marching across the frozen 
straits in a move that took Danish forces completely by surprise. Frederik sued for 
peace and the humiliating Treaty of Roskilde was signed in February 1658, whereby 
Denmark-Norway incurred significant territorial losses. 
For a brief period, it seemed possible that this ordeal would give way to a grudging 
alliance between the two nations, but as Frederik III stalled on his obligations set forth by the treaty, Charles X grew im-
patient. In August 1658, Charles sailed for Copenhagen. Besieged for more than six months, Swedish forces attempted to 
take the city in earnest in February 1659. The Swedish were repelled, with help from King Frederik III himself who was 
said to have exclaimed, “I shall die in my nest” to great rallying effect. The Treaty of Copenhagen was signed in 1660, which 
modified the earlier Treaty of Roskilde, and established mutually recognized borders of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden—
these boundaries look nearly identical today.
The most significant effect of Frederik III’s reign in Denmark-Norway must surely be the introduction of the absolute 
monarchy. Until this point, the monarchy had been an elective one; that is, while the succession typically followed the he-
reditary lines, it was not guaranteed, and the candidate had to be agreed upon by the Council of the Realm. In 1660, King 
Frederik declared a state of emergency in Denmark and summoned the Estates to Copenhagen on the pretext of resolving 
the postwar financial situation. Instead, he leveraged his support from the populace against the nobility and succeeded 
in gaining support for a hereditary monarchy and the institution of absolute monarchy in Denmark. The autocracy was 
enshrined in the 1665 King’s Law, the constitution of Denmark and Norway that would endure for nearly two centuries.
Frederik III was true to his word and died “in his nest” at Copenhagen Castle in 1670 at the age of 60. He is buried in 
Roskilde Cathedral.
Frederik III’s reign saw the coinage of many beautiful pieces. The Largesse Klippes struck for the coronation distribution 
display the word TANDEM (“Finally”), perhaps in reference to the end of his father’s 60 year reign or to his election as 
King after long deliberations by the Council of the Realm. It was around this time that the influence of European monetary 
systems became less one-way. The Kroner became so popular that not only were they traded regularly, but their designs 
were copied.
Frederik used the national coinage to mark significant events throughout his reign. A special Krone was struck to com -
memorate the storming of Copenhagen and the victory over the Swedes. Known as the “Ebenezer Krone, ” it depicts the 
Swedish king’s hand trying to grasp the Danish crown being cut off with a sword wielded by the Hand of God. The gold 
versions of these pieces (Portugalosers, or 10 Ducats) were possibly struck as gifts to officers who had distinguished them-
selves during the conflict. The introduction of the absolute monarchy was commemorated by the striking of a Double 
Ducat whose legend reads A DOMINO REGNUM VENIT (Monarchy cometh from the Lord). 
The Norwegian Akershus 2 Speciedaler was struck to commemorate the swearing of Norway’s allegiance to King Frederik 
and is arguably the most famous, beautiful, and coveted 17th century Norwegian coin in existence today. It is one of just 
three known specimens, with the other two residing in the National Museum of Denmark and the Gotha Coin Cabinet 
in Friedenstein.
(REIGNED 1648-1670)
Frederik III in armor by Karel van 
Mander III  (circa 1610–1670)
FREDERIK III

========== PAGE 95 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 71
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Lovely Mint State Double Speciedaler with Vibrant Toning
1055
DENMARK. 2 Speciedaler, 1641. Bremervörde Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-62. KM-39; Dav-5077; Hede-
2; Sieg-168; Schou-1; Aagaard-1.1; Lange-60 B; Bruun-5941. Weight: 58.23 gms. Mintmaster: Peter Timpfe 
(PT). Exceptional quality and bursting with multicolored toning, the type being  EXTREMELY RARE as well 
with only a handful in private collections. 
In 1634 Frederik became archbishop of Bremen and the following year bishop of Verden. After the Torstenson 
Feud (part of the European Thirty Years’ War) and the Treaty of Brömsebro in 1645 both territories were however 
lost to Sweden.
€20,000-€30,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 96 ==========

Page 72 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
A Considered to be Unique and Hefty Klippe of Frederik III
1056
DENMARK. Largesse 4 Ducats Klippe, 1648. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU Details—
Obverse Damage. Fr-72; KM-166; Hede-3; Sieg-129; Schou-23; Aagaard-2.1; Bruun-5979. Weight: 13.69 
gms. Mintmaster: Henrik Köhler. Thought to be UNIQUE with a mintage of only 5 pieces. Apart from a 
scratch in the right obverse field, a splendid example of this imposing gold piece.
For the celebration of the king’s coronation on the 23rd of November a series of unusual coins were minted on 
square flans to be used as largesse money. Silver coins with a total value of 1000 Rigsdalers were minted in 
denominations of 1/4, 1/6 and 1/12 Speciedaler to be thrown to the crowd in the streets of Copenhagen. Gold 
coins were also minted as Ducats and ½ Ducats that could have been used in the same way, whereas five sets of 
5, 4, 3 and 2 Ducats were minted for the personal use of the king and the chancellor, Corfitz Ulfeldt. The 5, 4 and 
3 Ducats are now all considered unique.
The reverse has been interpreted either as an urn spewing ashes or as an incense burner. On the receptacle is 
written, TANDEM, the Latin word for “finally” which might refer to the fact that Christian IV , after nearly 60 
years on the throne, had finally gone to meet his maker. It has been speculated that the reason for making the 
coins square was so they would not roll down the open sewers.
€40,000-€60,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Frederik C. Bech Collection (Sagførernes Auktioner, Copenhagen - 12/1906) Lot # 415.
Ex: Alfred Benzon Collection (Copenhagen - 5/1887) Lot # 947.

========== PAGE 97 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 73
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Tremendous Largesse Klippe with Bright Luster and Limited Circulation
1057
DENMARK. Largesse Ducat Klippe, 1648. Frederik III. Copenhagen Mint. NGC AU-58.  Fr-75; KM-
163.2; Hede-5A; Sieg-108.1; Schou-27; Aagaard-5.1; Bruun-5982. Weight: 3.45 gms. Mintmaster: Henrik 
Köhler. The utterly attractive condition makes this already  VERY RARE piece become excessively so. This 
beauty is highlighted by the rich details and the limited instances of actual handling seen throughout. 
The Ducat was the most valuable of the coins that were actually used as largesse money. At the coronation on 23 
November 1648, the king rode in a procession from Our Lady’s Church to Copenhagen Castle. Behind the king 
rode people who threw these coins specifically made for distribution to the masses.
€7,000-€9,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Portrait of Frederik III and Queen Sofia Amalia.

========== PAGE 98 ==========

Page 74 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Tremendous Mint State Ducat with Glittery Luster Throughout
1058
DENMARK. Ducat, 1649. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Hook. Frederik llI. NGC MS-63.  Fr-77; KM-
171; Hede-7; Sieg-109; Schou-1; Aagaard-8.1 (49-1/49-2); Bruun-5996. Weight: 3.45 gms. Mintmaster: Henrik 
Köhler. A superb and positively luminous example of this VERY RARE type. A truly attractive example not 
only for the type but among all Ducats of the time, with bright luster and sharp eye appeal. 
The obverse shows Frederik III dressed as a Roman emperor wearing toga and a laurel wreath, while the king’s 
royal motto: DOMINVS PROVIDEBIT (“The Lord will provide”) takes an uncommonly prominent place on the 
reverse. It clearly emerges from mintmaster Heinrich Köhler’s accounts that this early Ducat wasn’t minted at the 
request of the king but for the use of wealthy private citizens.
€7,000-€10,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 99 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 75
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Well Detailed and Rare Two Speciedalers
1059
DENMARK. 2 Speciedaler, 1649. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik lll. NGC AU Details—Obverse Cleaned.  
KM-170; Dav-3539; Hede-51; Sieg-70; Schou-4; Aagaard-74.1 (49-2/49-5); Bruun-5997. Weight: 57.79 gms. 
Mintmaster: Henrik Köhler (HK). Engraver: Hans zum Busch. Light surface marks but a very impressive 
strike with wonderful details.  EXCESSIVELY RARE as a Double Speciedaler with only three or four in 
private hands. 
Whereas most of the Speciedalers from the reign of Frederik III were exquisitely made but had a low mintage, the 
number of Speciedalers minted in the early reign of Frederik III (1649-1651) was considerable but rather crudely 
made. The apparent need of minted silver was however so urgent that although the king was very displeased with 
the engraver, Hans zum Busch’s abilities within the art of portraiture, he wasn’t fired until 1653. 
€8,000-€10,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Georg F. Timm Collection (Copenhagen - 7/1831) Lot # 826.

========== PAGE 100 ==========

Page 76 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Glorious 2 Krone with Stark and Charming Crown Reverse Design
1060
DENMARK. 2 Krone, 1651. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Poker. Frederik III. NGC AU-58.  KM-
183; Dav-3566; Hede-85; Sieg-43; Schou-13; Aagaard-1.1 (51-3/51-3); Bruun-6030. Weight: 37.52 gms. 
Mintmaster: Henrik Köhler. Engraver: Hans zum Busch. A splendid example with an impressive luster and a 
lovely golden toning near the rim. EXCESSIVELY RARE as a 2 Krone with less than ten known examples in 
both public and private collections combined. This variant presumably unique in private hands. The same die 
combination was also used to produce the regular Krone.
€6,000-€8,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Frederik C. Bech Collection (Sagførernes Auktioner, Copenhagen - 12/1906) Lot # 444.

========== PAGE 101 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 77
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Pleasingly Brilliant Mint State 1/2 Ducat
1061
DENMARK. 1/2 Ducat, 1652. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Poker. Frederik III. NGC MS-60. Fr-78; 
KM-188; Hede-8; Sieg-105; Schou-1; Aagaard-9.1; Bruun-6063. Weight: 1.72 gms. Mintmaster: Henrik 
Köhler. Engraver: Hans zum Busch. Rich luster and exquisite details combine to make the present example 
what is surely the best of only a handful privately owned examples of this highly sought-after one-year type.
€15,000-€20,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Frederik C. Bech Collection (Sagførernes Auktioner, Copenhagen - 12/1906) Lot # 452.
Ex: Alfred Benzon Collection (Copenhagen - 5/1887) Lot # 971.
Ex: L. Chr. Nielsen Collection (Copenhagen - 11/1878) Lot # 34.

========== PAGE 102 ==========

Page 78 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Stunning 1/2 Portugaloser with Nicely Preserved Luster
1062
DENMARK. 1/2 Portugaloser (5 Ducats), 1653. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Poker. Frederik III. 
NGC AU-55. Fr-98; KM-Pn10; Hede-12; Sieg-113; Schou-4; Aagaard-13.1 (53-1/53.1); Bruun-6083. Weight: 
17.18 gms. Mintmaster: Henrik Köhler. Engraver: Jeremias Hercules. A UNIQUE variant and a majestic, 
lustrous and beautifully struck example of this EXCESSIVELY RARE type which is known by only a handful 
of examples. 
These weighty gold types were probably made on the request of wealthy merchants for large international 
payments. The same obverse die was used to strike both 1, 2, 5 and 10 Ducats and while large multiple-Ducats 
were normally struck with a larger diameter or even with Taler dies, this emission is an extremely rare example 
of an exceedingly thick gold coin.
€50,000-€70,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 1241 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 103 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 79
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Nicely Detailed and Wholesome Double Ducat
1063
DENMARK. 2 Ducats, 1653. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Poker. Frederik III. NGC AU-55+. Fr-100; 
KM-200; Hede-11; Sieg-112; Schou-6; Aagaard-14.1 (53-1/53.1); Bruun-6085. Weight: 7.03 gms. Mintmaster: 
Henrik Köhler. Engraver: Jeremias Hercules. A immensely attractive example of this thick Double Ducat, 
with this example delivering a wholesome luster and sharp details. Circulation is limited, and the technical 
grade is at the top of its range, as evidenced by the plus designation. An example which is presumed to be 
UNIQUE in private hands.
€14,000-€18,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Peter v. Hemmert Collection (Copenhagen - 2/1807) Lot # 67.

========== PAGE 104 ==========

Page 80 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Bright and Shimmering Ducat with Immense Appeal
1064
DENMARK. Ducat, 1653. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Poker. Frederik III. NGC AU-58. Fr-101; KM-
198; Hede-10A; Sieg-111.1; Schou-9; Aagaard-15.2; Bruun-6087. Weight: 3.47 gms. Mintmaster: Henrik 
Köhler. Engraver: Jeremias Hercules. A positively charming example of this rare Ducat. Struck with the same 
obverse as the 5 and 2 Ducats in the previous lots but with a different reverse die with GOTHOR instead of 
GOTTOR in the king’s title.
€5,000-€7,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 1442 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 105 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 81
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Stately and Impressive Nearly Mint 2 Speciedaler
1065
DENMARK. 2 Speciedaler, 1653. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU-58.  KM-196.1; Dav-3541; 
Hede-53A; Sieg-72.1; Schou-12; Aagaard-80.1; Bruun-6089. Weight: 57.96 gms. Mintmaster: Henrik Köhler 
(HK). Engraver: Jeremias Hercules. VERY RARE and boasting a stately handsomeness, this 2 Speciedaler 
displays only the lightest touches of wear confined to the highest portions of the king’s cheek and hair. Plum 
and amber color highlights the underlying steely brilliance, with luster still peeking through. The few known 
examples of the type that have traded display far more handling than this coin, leaving this as a refreshing 
specimen that is likely to exceed all others.
€12,000-€16,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 1243 
in his collection.
Ex: Alfred Benzon Collection (Copenhagen - 5/1887) Lot # 988.


========== PAGE 106 ==========

Page 82 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 107 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 83
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Impressive Nearly Mint State 1/2 Portugaloser
1066
DENMARK. 1/2 Portugaloser (5 Ducats), 1655. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU-58. Fr-106; KM-
Pn13; Hede-54A; Sieg-73.1; Schou-2; Aagaard-83.1; Bruun-6174. Weight: 17.35 gms. Mintmaster: Henrik 
Köhler (HK). Engravers: Jeremias Hercules / Matthias Först. An utterly wonderful example of this majestic 
type, lustrous and superbly struck on an even flan, and surely the best of presumably only two privately 
owned examples with only two further examples in museums (Oslo, Smithsonian). The other privately owned 
example from the Bille-Brahe collection was sold to Schulman in the 1925 auction of duplicates from the L. E. 
Bruun collection for the price of DKK 1,900, making it the most expensive coin from this monarch.
Although this magnificent piece was struck from Taler dies (Davenport 3544), the exact weight of the surviving 
three examples clearly shows that it was struck as a 5 Ducats. An example of a 10 Ducats struck from the same 
dies was stolen from the Danish National Museum in 1806 and possibly melted.
Bruun bought this magnific piece at the estate auction of Herman Henrik Julius Lynge (1822-1897). Lynge 
is widely considered the father of the professional antiquarian book trade in Denmark. He obtained both the 
Danish and the Swedish medal of honor, and when he turned 70 he was awarded the title of “Kancelliråd” 
(titulary chancellor).
€70,000-€100,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: H. H. J. Lynge Collection (Copenhagen - 1899) Lot # 1143.

========== PAGE 108 ==========

Page 84 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Stunning Gem Krone that Displays Immense Flashy Luster
1067
DENMARK. Gold Krone, 1655. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-65. Fr-120; KM-206.2; Hede-
43B; Sieg-142.2; Schou-4; Aagaard-17.1; Bruun-6176. Weight: 6.00 gms. Mintmaster: Henrik Köhler. 
Engraver: Matthias Först or Jermias Hercules. A miraculous Gem quality survivor with gleaming luster that 
illuminates the surfaces and a strike that is nearly complete on both sides. A true miracle survivor for the 
period, as the chances of a gold coin with fragile surfaces appearing nearly perfectly untouched by time 
and human hands after close to four centuries is beyond reason. However, here it is, virtually as struck, and 
evidently the best of only two in private hands.
€20,000-€40,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 109 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 85
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Extremely Rare Mint State and Alluring Ducat
1068
DENMARK. Ducat, 1657. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Poker. Frederik III. NGC MS-61. Fr-101; KM-
215; Hede-14; Sieg-115; Schou-6; Aagaard-21.1; Bruun-6221. Weight: 3.50 gms. Mintmaster: Henrik Köhler. 
Engraver: Matthias Först. EXTREMELY RARE and of unconditionally superior condition, the surfaces glow 
with a bright luster and sheen and shimmer in the light. No circulation or handling is seen, and much allure 
and charm is yet present throughout.
€5,000-€7,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Peter v. Hemmert Collection (Copenhagen - 2/1807) Lot # 74.

========== PAGE 110 ==========

Page 86 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 111 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 87
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Impressive and Engaging Portugaloser with Striking Reverse Design
An Extremely Rare Offering in Gold
1069
DENMARK. Portugaloser (10 Ducats), 1659. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU-55.  Fr-123; 
KM-PnH16; Hede-99; Sieg-52; Schou-2; Aagaard-74.1 (59-E1/59-E1); Bruun-6273. Weight: 34.78 gms.  
Mintmaster: Henrik Köhler. An absolutely amazing example of this commanding issue. Exhibiting only 
minimal handling, and retaining much of the stunning bright eye appeal throughout. Nearly fully detailed, 
signs of wear are hard to locate, and the piece certainly presents quite well. 
This iconic type, of which the only other example known is in the National Museum of Denmark, was struck to 
commemorate the failure of the Swedish king, Carl X Gustav, to capture Copenhagen. The monogram of King 
Frederik III is shown above a stone with the text EBEN EZER, referring to the Old Testament (1 Samuel 7:12) in 
which Samuel erected a “stone of help” (Eben-ha-Ezer) between Mizpah and Jeshanah to honor the Lord for his 
help in securing the Israelites a victory over the Philistines.
The latin inscription on the reverse, SOLI DEO GLORIA, is another tribute to God (“To God alone be the glory”) 
while the dramatic design shows the hand of God (Manus Dei) severing the hand of the Swedish king with the 
sword of justice as he reaches out for the Danish crown. It has been suggested that the very rare pieces struck in 
gold might have been used as distinctions given to officers in the civic guard who had distinguished themselves 
during the siege.
€100,000-€150,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Peter Pedersen Collection (Private Sale - Before 1861).

========== PAGE 112 ==========

Page 88 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Superbly Struck and Lustrous Triple Ducat
Considered Unique Outside of a Museum
Featuring the Hand of the King of Sweden Being Severed by the Sword of Justice
1070
DENMARK. 3 Ducats, 1659. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-62. Fr-127; KM-PnA16; Hede-99; 
Sieg-52; Schou-8; Aagaard-74.1 (59-E1/59-E1); Bruun-6276. Weight: 10.47 gms. Mintmaster: Henrik Köhler. 
The 3 Ducat  has consistently ranked among the most popular of all Danish coins and has for the last 100 
years been considered unattainable, but here it is in completely spectacular condition, superbly struck and 
with almost full original luster. For the denomination, the only other known example is in the National 
Museum of Denmark.
€60,000-€80,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Frederik C. Bech Collection (Sagførernes Auktioner, Copenhagen - 10/1906) Lot # 495.

========== PAGE 113 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 89
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Delicately Handled Half Ducat
Featuring the Monogram of Frederik III
1071
DENMARK. 1/2 Ducat, 1659. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Poker. Frederik III. NGC AU-58.  Fr-
102; KM-229; Hede-15A; Sieg-106.1; Schou-11; Aagaard-23.1; Bruun-6277. Weight: 1.71 gms. Mintmaster: 
Henrik Köhler. Engravers: Matthias Först and Johan Blum. A most pleasing example of this RARE type, the 
present Half Ducat delivers sharp brilliance and only light signs of wear. An alluring specimen that is most 
certain to capture many excited bids.
€2,500-€3,500
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 1363 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 114 ==========

Page 90 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Alluring Silver Krone with Vibrant Luster and Striking Design
1072
DENMARK. Krone, 1659. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-63+.  KM-223; Dav-3578; Hede-
98; Sieg-51; Schou-32; Aagaard-74.1 (59-E1/59-E1); Bruun-6281. Weight: 21.95 gms.  Mintmaster: Henrik 
Köhler. Although this famous type is quite common in silver, it becomes a great rarity when the example is as 
spectacular as this piece, which may be unsurpassed in terms of of eye appeal.
€2,500-€3,500
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Siege of Copenhagen 1658-1659.

========== PAGE 115 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 91
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Lovely Quarter Ducat with a Sharp Strike
1073
DENMARK. 1/4 Ducat, 1660. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Poker. Frederik III. NGC MS-62. Fr-103; 
KM-235; Hede-19A; Sieg-101.1; Schou-6; Aagaard-25.1; Bruun-6329. Weight: 0.86 gms. Mintmaster: Henrik 
Köhler. Engraver: Johan Blum. A beautiful example, and one that is SCARCE this nice, the present offering 
delivers bright luster and limited signs of handling and sharp details. Stunning to look at, and an example for 
which we expect much attention.
€2,000-€2,500
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 116 ==========

Page 92 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L. E. Bruun Collection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Bright and Nicely Struck Ducat with Vibrant Tone
1074
DENMARK. Ducat, 1661. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Poker. Frederik III. NGC MS-62. Fr-101; KM-
236; Hede-16A; Sieg-116.1; Schou-3; Aagaard-24.6; Bruun-6365. Weight: 3.48 gms. Mintmaster: Henrik 
Köhler. Engravers: Matthias Först / Johan Blum. RARE, especially in this exquisite condition where the 
lustrous fields really make the semi-matte portrait stand out.
€6,000-€8,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 1425 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 117 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 93
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00 PM CEST / 5:00 AM PT
Johan Peter Samuel Goldschmidt, who as a coin collector is best known by 
the surname Guildal, which he acquired in 1906, was born in Copenhagen in 
1855, the son of a shipbroker. After completing an apprenticeship in a whole-
saler’s company, he traveled to both England and Germany to study dyeing 
technology, so that on his return he was qualified to enter his uncle’s dye -
ing company, Goldschmidt and Nordholm. Together with the Swede Anders 
Nordholm, Johan Guildal took over the management as early as 1880; when 
the company changed to a limited company in 1906, he continued as director 
until 1919. At the end of the 19th 
century and the beginning of the 
20th, Guildal was a central figure 
within Danish industry and crafts-
manship and held board positions 
in many important companies 
such as Handelsbanken, The Dan-
ish Coal Company, Danish Lloyd, 
The Danish-Russian Steamship 
Company, Atlas Machine Factory 
and Portland Cement Factory.
In 1899, the same year he was awarded the Order of the Dannebrog, Guil-
dal participated in the nine-month long voyage to East Asia on board the 
protected cruiser, Valkyrien (“The Valkyrie”), under the command of the 
king’s youngest son, Prince Valdemar.  The trip had been advocated ex-
pressly by the Danish parliament at the urging of Danish business inter -
ests. On the way visits were made to both the Siamese king Chulalongkorn 
and the Japanese emperor Meiji.
Guildal was also a prominent art collector, and his collection of old master prints was sold by Winkel & Magnus -
sen in 1931. Prints from his collection (easily recognizable from the small ink stamp verso, Lugt 1110a) can now be 
found in museums all over the world, including at the Metropolitan Museum in New Y ork and the Rijksmuseum in 
Amsterdam.
His main passion, however, was his coin collection. He was one of the founding fathers of the first Danish society for 
coin collectors formed in 1885, where L. E. Bruun was also a member. From 1914 through 1916 he acted as chair -
man of the still existing Numismatisk Forening (Danish Numismatic Society). Unlike L. E. Bruun, he didn’t collect 
medieval coins, but instead focused on the issues struck by the House of Oldenburg, which ruled Denmark from 
1448 to 1863.
Given his interest in the graphic arts it was only natural that he also collected paper money. Whereas this collection 
of 562 pieces is today a part of the collection at the National Museum of Denmark, Guildal decided to sell his coin 
collection in its entirety to L. E. Bruun in June 1918. Guildal was not a stranger to the idea of trading large collections 
en bloc, as he had himself acquired all Major General Carl Thorvald Jørgensen’s (1819-1902) formidable collection 
of Danish and Norwegian coins in 1901.
Shortly before his death on December 21, 1920, Guildal’s collection was published as vol. III of “Numismatisk 
Forenings Medlemsblad” and cataloged by Hans Henrik Schou. 
J. G. GUILDAL
(1850-1920) 
J.G. Guildal, Danish Royal Library.
Royal Danish Order of the 
Dannebrog, Grand Cross Star.

========== PAGE 118 ==========

Page 94 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Lightly Handled and Rainbow Toned Example
1075
DENMARK. 2 Speciedaler, 1661. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC EF-45.  KM-239; Dav-3545; 
Hede-58A; Sieg-76.1; Schou-9; Aagaard-86.3; Bruun-6368. Weight: 56.98 gms. Mintmaster: Henrik Köhler 
(HK). Engraver: Matthias Först. EXCESSIVELY RARE with only a handful known in private hands. A deep 
iridescent toning encircling the handsome portrait makes this a most attractive piece.
€10,000-€14,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 119 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 95
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Extremely Rare Type with No Others Known in Private Hands
One of Only Three Privately Held Triple Speciedalers of Frederik III
1076
DENMARK. 3 Speciedaler, 1662. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC VF Details—Obverse Graffiti.  
KM-231; Dav-A3547; Hede-63; Sieg-81; Schou-14; Aagaard-95.1; Bruun-6390. Weight: 85.99 gms. 
Mintmaster: Johan Stichmann (IS). Engraver: Johan Blum. Likely the only example in private hands, with 
the only other known example residing in the National Museum of Denmark. To say this 3 Speciedaler is 
EXTREMELY RARE would be to underplay its importance. When studying the entirety of Frederik III’s 
reign, only three examples of Triple Speciedalers have been registered as being privately owned. With no 
other examples on the horizon, bidders must consider this appearance as likely once-in-a-generation, and 
act accordingly. While this example does display some issues, with graffiti on the obverse, it is yet presentable 
and reasonably well detailed. A singular opportunity for the specialist in Danish coinage, and a piece that is 
numismatically and historically important.
€18,000-€22,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).


========== PAGE 120 ==========

Page 96 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Stunning Double Ducat with Handsome Luster
1077
DENMARK. 2 Ducats, 1663. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-63. Fr-117; KM-244; Hede-33B; 
Sieg-131.2; Schou-6; Aagaard-36.1; Bruun-6400. Weight: 6.93 gms. Mintmaster: Johan Stichmann (IS). 
Engraver: Johan Blum. The shimmering fields surround a splendidly rendered and fully detailed portrait and 
help to create a genuinely choice example of the type. EXCESSIVELY RARE as a type and even more so in 
this tremendous quality.
This beautiful gold type clearly mimics Blum’s Taler-type from 1662. The mintmaster and goldsmith Johan 
Stichmann is known to have been in charge of a part of the militia when Copenhagen was unsuccessfully stormed 
by the Swedes on 11 February 1659.
€15,000-€18,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 121 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 97
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Extremely Beautiful Speciedaler with Striking Obverse Design
One of Two Known Examples
1078
DENMARK. Speciedaler, 1663. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC Unc Details—Cleaned.  KM-248; 
Dav-3549; Hede-65; Sieg-83; Schou-16; Aagaard-98.1; Bruun-6405. Weight: 29.72 gms. Whereas the only 
other known example in the National Museum of Denmark has been holed, the present piece, although 
having been cleaned long ago, is highly attractive. A legendary RARITY and one of the most beautiful of 
all the silver coins of Frederik III. The piece is unfortunately not signed but the unusually sophisticated and 
intricate design and the overall technical and artistic quality point in the direction that this is possibly a trial 
from the hands of an unknown foreign master.
The coin was formerly in the famed collection of Dr. Antoine-Feill, Hamburg, and was bought by Bruun in the 
auction conducted by Joseph Hamburger, Frankfurt in 1907.
€40,000-€60,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Dr. Antoine-Feill Collection (Joseph Hamburger, Frankfurt am Main - 11/1907) Lot # 77.

========== PAGE 122 ==========

Page 98 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 123 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 99
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Exceptional Mint State 5 Ducats with Bright Luster
Likely Once Owned by King Frederik VII
Only Known Example Privately Available
1079
DENMARK. 5 Ducats, 1664. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-61.  Fr-114; KM-Unlisted; Hede-
62B; Sieg-80.2; Schou-2; Aagaard-99.1; Bruun-6411. Weight: 17.26 gms. Mintmaster: Caspar Herbach (CH). 
Engraver: Johan Blum. A luminous and positively awe-inspiring example of this monumental and highly 
important type. The only other known example was acquired by Spink for the Smithsonian at the 1961 
Ragoczy Sale, lot 421. 
A shelved die for Johan Stichmann’s Speciedaler from 1662 was used for the obverse, whereas the reverse die is 
known from gold 5 and 10 Ducats and a unique Double Taler held in the National Museum of Denmark.
Presumably struck for the king’s personal use. It is also quite likely that this particular example has in fact been 
in royal possession since it was first made. It was bequeathed to counsellor of state, Julius Gustav Berger Klemp 
(1813-1890), who had acted as executor of king Frederik VII’s estate by his widow, countess Louise Danner.
€70,000-€100,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: J. G. B. Klemp Collection (Copenhagen - 1891) Lot # 344.
Presumably ex: King Frederik VII of Denmark Collection.

========== PAGE 124 ==========

Page 100 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 125 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 101
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Phenomenally Designed and Artfully Rendered Quadruple Ducat
1080
DENMARK. 4 Ducats, 1664. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-62. Fr-110; KM-217.2; Hede-30B; 
Sieg-135.2; Schou-4; Aagaard-37.1; Bruun-6412. Weight: 13.94 gms. Mintmaster Caspar Herbach. Engraver: 
Johan Blum. Unique variant of the two known examples (the other being in the National Museum of 
Denmark). A magnificent example which has clearly never seen any circulation, and where the the details are 
so vivid that you can almost feel the strong wind in the sails. The beautifully rendered full-rigged ship on the 
reverse is used to symbolize the fact that the coin itself had been struck with gold brought back from overseas.
Caspar Herbach, who went under the name “Kunst-Caspar”, was a Saxon goldsmith, architect and alchemist. 
He was active as a mintmaster in Copenhagen for less than a year (from November 2, 1663 until his death on 
October 18, 1664). For the obverse he used a shelved die by Johan Stichmann.
This example was formerly in the collection of merchant and shipowner Peter von Hemmert / van Hemert (1734-
1810), who functioned as one of the directors in the Danish Asiatic Company from 1776 to 1783. Partly due to 
the general economic downturn for merchant ships following the end of the American Revolutionary War and 
partly due to an embezzlement scandal at the Asiatic Company, von Hemmert was financially brought to his 
knees. The downfall culminated in 1805 when his company was taken into bankruptcy, and only two years later, 
he was forced to sell his coin collection, which was astoundingly rich in large and excessively rare gold coins, at 
auction.
€50,000-€70,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Peter v. Hemmert (Copenhagen - 2/1807) Lot # 92.

========== PAGE 126 ==========

Page 102 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 127 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 103
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Handsome 5 Ducats with Stunningly Appealing Luster
1081
DENMARK. 1/2 Portugaloser (5 Ducats), 1665. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-61. Fr-81; KM-
253; Hede-72; Sieg-140A; Schou-4; Aagaard-147.1; Bruun-6436. Weight: 17.46 gms. Mintmaster: Gotfred 
Krüger (GK). Engraver: Jeremias Hercules. A gleaming and superb example, meticulously struck as would be 
expected from a presentation piece. Only a handful of examples are known of which half are privately owned. 
The obverse die was later used in the production of 2 Mark silver coins (Aagaard 149), whereas the elegant 
reverse is known only as a presentation pattern in silver and as 5 Ducats presumably for the personal use of 
the king.
€60,000-€80,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Peter v. Hemmert Collection (Copenhagen - 2/1807) Lot # 96.
Jeremias Hercules, Danish medallist.

========== PAGE 128 ==========

Page 104 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Alluring Fractional Ducat with 
Only Three Known Pieces in Private Hands
1082
DENMARK. Gold 3 Mark (1/4 Ducat), 1665. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-63. Fr-129; KM-
264.2; Hede-40C; Sieg-102.1; Schou-12; Aagaard-58.1; Bruun-6441. Weight: 0.90 gms. Mintmaster: Gotfred 
Krüger (GK). Presumably engraved by Jeremias Hercules. Only two or three examples in private hands, 
plus one in the National Museum of Denmark. An astonishingly perfect example of this type which quite 
unconventionally for a gold coin bears the denomination of 3 Mark (1/2 Taler) written all across the reverse. 
It has been suggested that these very small gold coins (0.90 g) were minted for the king to be used as handouts on 
his domestic travels.
€8,000-€12,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 129 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 105
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Nicely Detailed and Lightly Circulated 2 Speciedaler
1083
DENMARK. 2 Speciedaler, 1665. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU Details—Cleaned. KM-
263; Dav-3552; Hede-69; Sieg-87; Schou-15; Aagaard-105.1 (65-2/65-2); Bruun-6442. Weight: 56.38 gms. 
Mintmaster: Frederik Caspar Herbach (FCH). Engraver: Jeremias Hercules. Albeit at some point possibly 
lightly cleaned, a superb and nicely retoned example of this  EXCESSIVELY RARE and beautiful Double 
Speciedaler.
€12,000-€16,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 130 ==========

Page 106 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Exceptional Star Graded Gold Krone with Superb Eye Appeal
Struck upon King’s Personal Direction
1084
DENMARK. Gold Krone, 1666. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-64 ★. Fr-88; KM-278; Hede-
44; Sieg-144; Schou-7; Aagaard-60.1; Bruun-6498. Weight: 5.63 gms. Mintmaster: Gotfred Krüger GK). 
Engraver: Jeremias Hercules.  EXTREMELY RARE and of breathtaking quality with dazzling brilliance in 
the fields and subtle frosting on the devices — quite frankly one of the most beautiful of all existing coins in 
gold minted for Frederik III. The exquisite portrait is one of the absolute best of Frederik III. Unfortunately 
the engraver is no longer known, and a theory that this Krone might be the work of a very young Anton 
Meybusch hardly seems plausible. Although the actual number of Gold Kroners minted is unknown, it is 
known from a preserved written instruction from the king to the mintmaster, Krüger, that the king alone 
decided how many were to be struck.
€20,000-€40,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Peter v. Hemmert Collection (Copenhagen - 2/1807) Lot # 100.

========== PAGE 131 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 107
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Beautiful Nearly-Choice 18 Mark with Sunny Disposition
1085
DENMARK. 18 Mark (Guld-Krone), 1668. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-62.  Fr-92; KM-
303; Hede-46; Sieg-143; Aagaard-62.1 (68.1/68.1); Schou-2; Bruun-6638. Weight: 5.55 gms. Mintmaster: 
Gotfred Krüger (GK). A sharply struck and intensely lustrous example of this EXCEEDINGLY SCARCE 
type. While the obverse portrait ranks among the best from the reign of Frederik III, the reverse bears the 
unique denomination of XVIII (18) M(arck), which at the time was the equivalent of 4-1/2 silver Kroner.
€10,000-€12,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 132 ==========

Page 108 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Strikingly Designed and Well Preserved Speciedaler
1086
DENMARK. Speciedaler, 1666. Gluckstadt Mint. Frederik III. NGC Unc Details—Reverse Cleaned. KM-
51; Dav-3673; Hede-148; Sieg-156; Schou-20; Aagaard-11.2; not in Lange; Bruun-6558. Weight: 28.59 gms. 
Mintmaster: Johan Woltereck (IW). Although possibly ever so lightly cleaned at one point, this example, with 
its multicolored tone around the obverse legends, is absolutely enchanting. The only other known example 
rests in the National Museum of Denmark. 
The figure of Fortuna has been added to the reverse die with a punch instead of being engraved directly in the die. 
This seems to be the earliest use of a punch this large in Danish coin production.
€20,000-€25,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 133 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 109
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Simply Marvelous Double Ducat
Featuring a Sailing Ship Engraved by Jeremias Hercules
1087
DENMARK. 2 Ducats, 1667. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS 63 ★. Fr-112; KM-295; Hede-31; 
Sieg-136; Schou-3; Aagaard-56.1; Bruun-6572. Weight: 6.94 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik Caspar Herbach. 
Engraver: Jeremias Hercules. An out-of-this-world almost prooflike example with meticulous detail remaining 
within the stunning portrait of Frederik III’s as well as the evocative ship design on the reverse.
This VERY RARE Double Ducat was made by the very talented German engraver, Jeremias Hercules, who 
designed some of the most beautiful coins and medals from the reign of Frederik III and Christian V .
€15,000-€30,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Frederik C. Bech Collection (Sagførernes Auktioner, Copenhagen - 12/1906) Lot # 590.
Ex: Johan Andreas Wolff (Copenhagen 3/1882) Lot # 933.

========== PAGE 134 ==========

Page 110 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Beautiful Nearly Uncirculated Ducat with Much Eye Appeal
1088
DENMARK. Ducat, 1667. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU-58.  Fr-82; KM-304; Hede-35; Sieg-
125; Schou-5; Aagaard-61.1; Bruun-6573. Weight: 3.47 gms. Mintmaster: Gotfred Krüger (GK). A superlative 
example of this EXTREMELY RARE type that bears close resemblance to Krüger’s Speciedalers from the 
same year (Hede 73). The surfaces are bright and rich, with strong details throughout and limited signs of 
actual handling or circulation.
€10,000-€13,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 135 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 111
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Beautiful Ducat With Handsome Luster and Limited Handling
1089
DENMARK. Ducat, 1667. Copenhagen Mint; Privy Mark: Clover. Frederik III. NGC MS-61. Fr-104; KM-
294; Hede-26A; Sieg-124.1; Schou-6; Aagaard-53.1; Bruun-6574. Weight: 3.48 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik 
Caspar Herbach. Engraver: Jeremias Hercules. A charming Mint State example of this  EXTREMELY RARE 
coin, with bright luster and pinpoint precise strike. A most wholesome and handsome specimen that will 
doubtlessly capture many excited bids.
€7,000-€10,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 136 ==========

Page 112 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Double Speciedaler with  
Charming Toning and No Actual Circulation
The Only Known 1668 Double Speciedaler
1090
DENMARK. 2 Speciedaler, 1668. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC Unc Details—Cleaned. KM-
233; Dav-B3557; Hede-77; Sieg-93; Schou-8; Aagaard-109.1; Bruun-6642. Weight: 57.56 gms. Mintmaster: 
Frederik Caspar Herbach (FCH). Engraver: Jeremias Hercules. A wonderfully delicate and highly impressive 
example, engraved with great precision and depicting a lion’s head on the shoulder of the king’s cuirass. This 
is the only known example of this majestic Double Speciedaler, which isn’t even to be found in the National 
Museum of Denmark or other public collections around the world.
Almost all of the reference catalogs mistakenly describes this coin as a 3 Taler although the weight clearly indicates 
that it is in fact a Double Taler.
€30,000-€40,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 137 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 113
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Appealing Mint State Ducat With Bright Luster Throughout
1091
DENMARK. Ducat, 1669. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-60. Fr-109; KM-313; Hede-37; Sieg-
126; Schou-3; Aagaard-64.1 (69-1/69-2); Bruun-6690. Weight: 3.42 gms. Mintmaster: Gotfred Krüger (GK). 
A delightful Mint State example of this EXCEEDINGLY RARE type, with only about three or four examples 
known. This particular reverse die is only known from this example.
The reverse design featuring three individual heraldic shields (representing the three lions of Denmark; the axe-
bearing lion of Norway, and the three Swedish crowns), instead of one subdivided coat of arms, was reused on 
the first of Christian V’s Ducats.
€10,000-€14,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 138 ==========

Page 114 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Masterful and Vividly Lustrous 2 Speciedaler
1092
DENMARK. 2 Speciedaler, 1669. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-63.  KM-311; Dav-3564; 
Hede-81; Sieg-98; Schou-8; Aagaard-121.1; Bruun-6693. Weight: 57.44 gms. Mintmaster: Gotfred Krüger 
(GK). Featuring the king’s royal motto, DOMINVS PROVIDEBIT (God will provide) and the date (ANNO 
MDCLXIX) which can be read on the lettered edge, this magnificent 2 Speciedaler displays all the rich 
vibrance and allure one might expect for the assigned grade. Beautifully argent with a rich luster, this example 
displays light goldenrod toning at the peripheries. The strike is well-executed, with the fine details in the 
king’s armor and the reverse being a masterwork.
€8,000-€10,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.


========== PAGE 139 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 115
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Beautiful Mint State Example with Engaging Blue Toning
The Finest in Private Hands
1093
DENMARK. Speciedaler, 1669. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-61. KM-308; Dav-3563; Hede-
78B; Sieg-94.2; Schou-13; Aagaard-114.1; Bruun-6697. Weight: 28.65 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik Caspar 
Herbach (FCH). Engraver: Jeremias Hercules. Of the handful of known examples, this is by far the best. 
Bright luster is complemented by rich colorful toning and good eye appeal. A most deserving specimen 
worthy of much consideration from specialists in the series.
€5,000-€7,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922). The 1928 Bruun catalog records this coin as being ex 
Timm, but the handwritten Bille-Brahe ledger held at the Danish National Museum notes that the Timm specimen 
was sorted out of the Bille-Brahe collection as a duplicate before Bruun’s purchase of the collection.

========== PAGE 140 ==========

Page 116 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Impressive Prooflike 2 Ducats of 1670
1094
DENMARK. 2 Ducats, 1670. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-62 Prooflike.  Fr-95; KM-326; 
Hede-38; Sieg-138; Schou-1; Aagaard-65.1; Bruun-6728. Weight: 6.95 gms. Mintmaster: Gotfred Krüger 
(GK). EXTREMELY RARE. The mirror-like fields and the frosty finish of the devices combine to reach a 
prooflike grading which is normally quite unobtainable for a coin of this period.
Whereas numerous bust styles were traditionally executed during the reign of king, this extraordinarily beautiful 
Double-Ducat with the elegant quadruple double monogram on the reverse depicts the Roman-inspired laureate 
head of the king. It became the last portrait of the king, who died on the 9th of February 1670.
€35,000-€50,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 141 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 117
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Lovely Fractional Ducat in Enviable Condition
1095
DENMARK. 1/4 Ducat, 1670. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-64.  Fr-130; KM-325; Hede-
42; Sieg-103; Schou-3; Aagaard-66.1; Bruun-6731. Weight: 0.87 gms. Mintmaster: Gotfred Krüger (GK). 
A pleasing near-Gem example of this popular 1/4 Ducat, offering brilliant luster and sharp eye appeal 
throughout. A most enviable example of this SCARCE type, presenting nearly as well as when this piece was 
first produced.
€3,000-€4,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 142 ==========

Page 118 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 143 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 119
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Magnificent and Visually Stunning Choice Mint State 10 Ducats
A Masterwork of Scandinavian Artistry Rendered in Fine Gold
1096
DENMARK. 10 Ducats (Portugaloser), ND (1668-69). Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-
63★. Fr-Unlisted; KM-Unlisted; Hede-80B (mistakenly listed as 80A); Sieg-96.2; Schou-3; Aagaard-119.2; 
Bruun-6736. Weight: 34.46 gms. Mintmaster: Gotfred Krüger. The only other example known is in the National 
Museum of Denmark (Beskrivelsen 884, Pl. XIX,4). An immensely attractive monumental showpiece and a 
true numismatic treasure, this example is of unsurpassable beauty with shimmering fields and delicately 
frosted devices.
This 10 Ducat was struck with the same dies that were used for the Speciedaler 1669, which carried the date on 
the edge.
€150,000-€200,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 144 ==========

Page 120 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Bright and Alluring Speciedaler with Stunning Luster
1097
DENMARK. Speciedaler, ND (1669). Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-61. KM-309; Dav-3565; 
Hede-82; Sieg-97; Schou-14; Aagaard-122.1; Bruun-6744. Weight: 28.76 gms. Mintmaster: Gotfred Krüger 
(GK). SCARCE and immediately pleasing, this Speciedaler yields good eye appeal with a bold strike and deep 
tomes of toning. A piece most deserving of many excited bids.
€5,000-€7,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Peter v. Hemmert Collection (Copenhagen - 2/1807) Lot # 14.

========== PAGE 145 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 121
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Beautifully Toned and Alluring Speciedaler
1098
DENMARK. Speciedaler, ND (1668-69). Copenhagen Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-62. KM-301; Dav-
3560; Hede-80A; Sieg-96.1; Schou-17; Aagaard-118.2; Bruun-6745. Weight: 29.17 gms. Mintmaster: Gotfred 
Krüger. A glowing and most appealing example of this stunning and SCARCE Speciedaler delivers bright 
luster with lovely rainbow toning throughout. The details are exceptionally executed, being of a most refined 
and stunning style. As such, this example will doubtlessly command much attention.
€4,000-€6,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Alfred Benzon Collection (Copenhagen - 5/1887) Lot # 1502.

========== PAGE 146 ==========

Page 122 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Christian V reigned as the King of Denmark and Norway from 1670 until his 
death in 1699. Born in 1646 to King Frederik III, Christian V ascended to the 
throne at the age of 24 as the first hereditary King of Denmark-Norway. His 
reign was characterized by efforts to centralize power and strengthen the mon-
archy, influenced by absolutist ideals prevalent in Europe during the 17th cen-
tury; Christian witnessed firsthand the splendid court of the Sun King Louis 
XIV , the iconic embodiment of absolutism itself.
Christian was generally well regarded by his subjects, though perhaps ill-pre -
pared for the job. Having been kept away from the affairs of state as a youngster, 
he relied heavily on advisors like the Count of Griffenfeld, whom he elevated to 
that position early in his reign. 
Christian’s popularity was somewhat tainted by his entry into the Scanian War 
in an attempt to reclaim lands that had been ceded in the Treaty of Roskilde. 
The expedition failed, exhausted the country’s economic resources, and yield-
ed no gains. Even so, Christian V’s reign was a period of rich reform, in which 
the autocracy succeeded in seriously consolidating itself and modernizing the 
social structure through major initiatives such as the Danish Law of 1683, the 
Norwegian Law of 1687 and the Great Land Register of 1688.
Christian V died in 1699 after complications following a hunting accident at 
the age of 53.
Christian V’s reign introduced several newer concepts into the realm of coinage. First, upon his accession in 1670, a 
double portrait Speciedaler was struck to mark the occasion, featuring the late King Frederik III on one side and the 
newly crowned Christian V on the other. This custom of depicting a double portrait was followed by several mon -
archs to come. Upon advice from the Kommercekollegium (his group of finance and trade advisors), mint assayers 
were appointed to ensure the quality of the coins struck. Efforts were made to improve coining techniques overall; 
Anton Meybusch, the German medallist and die sinker, produced many beautiful dies during this period.
(REIGNED 1670-1699)
Christian V by 
Jacques d’ Agar (1640–1715)
Christian V with his eldest son, later Frederik IV and his other male children.
CHRISTIAN V

========== PAGE 147 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 123
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Stately and Battleship Gray Speciedaler
1099
DENMARK. Speciedaler, MDCLXX (1670). Copenhagen Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-62. KM-322; Dav-
3629; Hede-61A; Sieg-58.1; Schou-7; Bruun-6754. Weight: 28.99 gms. Mintmaster: Gotfred Krüger. Engraver: 
Jeremias Hercules. The rim bears the royal motto, PIETATE-ET-JUSTITIA (piety and justice) and the date in 
Roman numerals, MDCLXX. This nearly-Choice Speciedaler offers bold details, with a handsome steely gray 
appeal and alluring details throughout. A most impressive and wholesome example.
€8,000-€10,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Peter v. Hemmert Collection (Copenhagen - 2/1807) Lot # 1111.

========== PAGE 148 ==========

Page 124 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 149 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 125
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Choice Mint State 2 Speciedaler
Produced for the Danish East India Company
1100
DENMARK. Danish East India Company. 2 Speciedaler, 1671. Copenhagen Mint. Christian V . NGC 
MS-63. KM-319; Dav-408; Hede-64; Sieg-61; Schou-4; Bruun-6757. Weight: 57.99 gms. Mintmaster: Gotfred 
Krüger (GK). Engraver: Jeremias Hercules. An EXCESSIVELY RARE trade coin for The Danish East India 
Company (DOC - Dansk Ostindisk Compagni). This tremendous numismatic offering combines beauty 
with desirability in one exquisite package. Technically the surfaces are beautiful, with this rich Choice Mint 
example being the sole example seen by either NGC or PCGS. Alluring and appealing luster glows and glitters, 
with soft color throughout that gives a handsome variegated hue. The fine details are both well-engraved and 
struck to a precise degree, with nothing wanting for details. An example that should be most desirable, given 
its connection to the Danish East Indies Company, this 2 Speciedaler is among the more elusive examples of 
trade coinage, and it is a beautiful one at that.
The Danish East India Company (Dansk Ostindisk Compagni) was created on the initiative of Christian IV 
as the first Danish shareholding company. The king was the largest shareholder, but among the investors were 
nobility and citizens in Denmark, Norway and the duchies. The intention with the establishment of the company 
was to gain a share in the trade in spices, silk and cotton on a par with Holland and England, and the company 
was given a monopoly on trade with Asia by sea. In 1618 the first expedition was sent, and as a result of this 
expedition the trading station of Tranquebar was established on the Coromandel coast in south-east India. In 
Continued on Page 126

========== PAGE 150 ==========

Page 126 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
the first years the financial yield was, however, modest and the company was dissolved in 1650. It was not until 
1668 that a ship was again sent from Denmark-Norway to Asia, and in 1670 a new East India Company was 
established. As the trading goods were predominantly paid for in silver, the newly started company funded the 
present mintage, which they had obtained the privilege to mint at the Royal Mint in Copenhagen. At the end of 
the 17th century, trade experienced better business conditions and it was possible to send out an average of two 
ships per year.
€100,000-€150,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: August C. Mohr Collection (Copenhagen - 10/1847) Lot # 2970.
 
Beautiful Nearly-Choice Ducat with Stunning Luster
1101
DENMARK. Ducat, 1672/1. Copenhagen Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-62.  Fr-140; KM-340.1; Hede-2; 
Sieg-85; Schou-1; Bruun-6775. Weight: 3.45 gms. Mintmaster: Gotfred Krüger (GK). Engraver: Jeremias 
Hercules. A VERY SCARCE coin in a highly desirable state of preservation, offering sunny and bright luster. 
Bold details and limited handling round out this example’s attributes, and make it certain to capture much 
attention.
€5,000-€7,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Peter v. Hemmert Collection (Copenhagen - 2/1807) Lot # 122.

========== PAGE 151 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 127
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Handsome Nearly Mint Ducat with Lovely Elephant Design
1102
DENMARK. 2 Ducats, 1673. Copenhagen Mint. Christian V . NGC AU-58. Fr-198; KM-346; Hede-3; Sieg-
118; Schou-7; Bruun-6808. Weight: 6.86 gms. Mintmaster: Gotfred Krüger. Engraver: Jeremias Hercules. 
A glorious example of this SCARCE and amusing type, with limited signs of handling and much retained 
luster. An example that presents nearly as well as a Mint State example, and a piece whose faults are difficult 
to pickout. 
Although the statues, which are still valid, were not written until 1693, the tower-bearing elephant had since the 
late middle-ages been a part of Denmark’s oldest and most distinguished royal order of chivalry.
€18,000-€22,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 152 ==========

Page 128 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Beautifully Detailed and Charming
Near-Gem Ducat with Handsome Luster
1103
DENMARK. Ducat, 1674. Gluckstadt Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-64. Fr-134; KM-64.1; Hede-115B; Sieg-
142.2; Schou-2; Aagaard-2.4; Lange-80; Bruun-6824. Weight: 3.45 gms. Mintmaster: Johan Woltereck (IW). 
RARE and appealing, this near-Gem glows with a bright charm and a vibrant sunniness. The handsomely 
applied details are sharp and clear, with only the smallest touches of strike weakness. No major defects afflict 
the surfaces, and this Ducat is certainly not short on appeal.
The Ducats struck in Glückstadt differ from the ones struck in Copenhagen in being minted for regular trade use 
rather than just as occasion coins.
€5,000-€7,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 153 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 129
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Beautiful Mint State Speciedaler with Light Golden Luster
1104
DENMARK. Speciedaler, 1675. Copenhagen Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-61. KM-352; Dav-3631; Hede-
65; Sieg-62; Schou-4; Bruun-6830. Weight: 28.81 gms. Mintmaster: Gotfred Krüger. Engraver: Jeremias 
Hercules. A bright Mint State example, the present offering yields handsome brilliance with a steely gray 
appearance. Slight color has adhered itself to the surfaces, with light golden hues and more colorful dapples 
at the peripheries. Minor forms of handling appear in the fields, accounting for the overall grade. 
A charming example that is often mistakenly referred to as an “ Anointment Taler” on account of its similarity 
with Hercules’ medal, Galster 95, which is actually four years older.
€4,000-€5,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 154 ==========

Page 130 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Handsomely Toned and Brilliant Krone from the Scanian War
1105
DENMARK. Krone, 1680-GS. Copenhagen Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-62. KM-365; Hede-76; Sieg-36; 
Schou-17; Aagaard-24; Bruun-6898. Weight: 22.26 gms. Mintmaster: Gregorius Sesemann (GS). Engraver: 
Jeremias Hercules. Most enticing and appealing, this Krone delivers handsome watercolor tone throughout 
the fields, with a deep appearance as the peripheries are reached. Nice luster beneath attractive toning, this 
Krone avoids the pitfalls of major marks or handling. A specimen that is certainly a cut above what is normally 
encountered. 
The king is shown in full armor symbolizing the fact that he had personally participated in a number of battles 
in the Scanian War against Sweden. The Scanian War was a conflict involving Sweden, Brandenburg, and the 
union of Denmark-Norway that lasted from 1675 to 1680. The Danish objective was to recover Scanian lands 
that had previously been lost to Sweden. This aim was ultimately unsuccessful, with Sweden retaining the lands 
and Denmark receiving only minor war reparations from Sweden. 
€4,000-€5,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 155 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 131
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Radiantly Lustrous Ducat from Christian V
1106
DENMARK. Ducat, 1680. Gluckstadt Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-62. Fr-141; KM-70.1; Hede-117; Sieg-
144.4; Schou-2; Aagaard-7.1, Bruun-6911. Weight: 3.45 gms. Mintmaster: Christopher Woltereck (CW). 
A wonderfully preserved Mint State example on which a few hairlines in the obverse field are visible only 
because of the abounding luster. The type as such is excessively rare and this variant is in fact UNIQUE with 
no examples known in public collections.
Across the series of Ducats struck at Glückstadt between 1672 and 1685, the portraits of Christian V are 
numerous, with varying degrees of true likeness. It therefore seems likely that a number of different (unnamed) 
engravers and goldsmiths were employed when required by a given demand for gold.
€8,000-€10,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 156 ==========

Page 132 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Beautiful Choice Mint State Ducat with Rich Luster
1107
DENMARK. Ducat, 1681. Copenhagen Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-63. Fr-147; KM-371; Hede-10; Sieg-
88; Schou-1; Bruun-6920. Weight: 3.45 gms. Mintmaster: Gregorius Sesemann (GS). EXTREMELY RARE, 
this gorgeous Choice Mint State Ducat yields handsome eye appeal, with bright and shimmering brilliance. 
An entrancing mirrorlike appearance besets the surfaces, allowing one to catch much reflectivity. This allure 
is not dampened by excess hits or handling, and the commendably engraved details are well struck.
€10,000-€14,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 157 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 133
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Beautiful Nearly-Choice Ducat
Featuring the King in a Night Watchman’s Costume
1108
DENMARK. Ducat, 1682. Gluckstadt Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-62. Fr-176; KM-72; Hede-118; Sieg-
145; Schou-2; Aagaard-9.1; Lange-81; Bruun-6973. Weight: 3.45 gms. Mintmaster: Christopher Woltereck 
(CW). An absolutely handsome near-Choice example of this RARE, highly unusual and very interesting one-
year type where the king is depicted wearing the costume of a night watchman. The bright luster of this Ducat 
glows and glimmers, with bold details throughout and limited actual handling or marking. 
A Speciedaler with the same obverse design has the following lettering on the edge: SI VIGILANT ALII NET 
ME VIGILARE DECET (“When others watch so should I”). The type is commonly believed to be struck for a 
particular occasion where the utmost vigilance of both king and country were called upon.
€20,000-€30,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Peter F. Suhm Collection (Copenhagen - 8/1800) Lot # 114.

========== PAGE 158 ==========

Page 134 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Appealing 2 Ducats with Alluring Details and Good Luster
1109
DENMARK. 2 Ducats, 1687. Copenhagen Mint. Christian V . NGC Unc Details—Obverse Graffiti.  Fr-
152; KM-390; Hede-15; Sieg-120; Schou-3; Bruun-7030. Weight: 7.00 gms. Mintmaster: Gregorius Sesemann 
(GS). VERY RARE and a most sought type, this intricate 2 Ducats displays a resounding luster that delivers an 
overrunning of brilliance when held in the light. The graffiti mentioned by NGC arises from some indistinct 
characters lightly etched on the obverse, a difficult feature to pick up unless held at the proper angle. This 
issue is relatively minor in how it impacts the overall presentability of the coin. A type that captures the 
beauty of numismatics, with the stunning reverse design being particularly awe inspiring.
€20,000-€25,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 159 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 135
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
A Unique Type with Lettered Edge and Featuring Fort Christiansborg
1110
DENMARK. 2 Ducats, 1688. Copenhagen Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-63 Prooflike.  Fr-167; KM-
395.1; Hede-23A; Sieg-94; Schou-2; Bruun-7035. Weight: 6.87 gms. Mintmaster: Gregorius Sesemann. A 
UNIQUE example with lettered edge reading: PIETATE ET IUSTITIA (royal motto). Displaying a brilliant 
and handsome luster, this Double Ducat glows with a bright luster and the fields display mirrored prooflike 
surfaces. The sharp details are well executed, with icy frosting besetting them. Light friction likely accounts 
for the technical grade, and a pronounced die crack can be seen on the reverse. A most appealing example, 
with a stunning and intricate reverse depiction. 
The reverse offers a bird’s eye view of the Danish outpost on Africa’s Gold Coast, Fort Christiansborg (now Osu 
Castle), located in what is now Ghana along the Gulf of Guinea. The fortress became the Danish administrative 
headquarters of Guinea in 1685 and was predominantly used as a place of embarkation of enslaved local captives 
for the Danish colonies in the Caribbean.
€20,000-€25,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 1915 
in his collection (illustrated).

========== PAGE 160 ==========

Page 136 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 161 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 137
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Beautiful and Lustrous Gold 4 Mark of 10 Ducats Weight
1111
DENMARK. Gold 4 Mark (of 10 Ducats Weight), 1689. Copenhagen Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-61.  
Fr-Unlisted; KM-Pn30; Hede-25; Sieg-Unlisted; Schou-1; Bruun-7039. Weight: 34.65 gms. Mintmaster: 
Gregorius Sesemann (GS). Thin monogram type. With only three to four examples known, this alluring gold 
4 Mark displays bright luster and only limited signs of actual handling. Details are sharp and appealing, with a 
nice clarity and limited signs of past handling. A stunning and handsome large format example that is worthy 
of a premium bid from any collector seeking a capstone piece. 
As the denomination (IIII Marck) clearly indicates, this must be considered a trial for a new but never realized 
silver Krone (4 Mark). It was however struck in gold with the weight of a Portugaloser/10 Ducats (34.65 gms) so 
it could be presented to the king for his personal consideration.
€150,000-€250,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Peter Pedersen Collection (Private Sale - Prior to 1861).

========== PAGE 162 ==========

Page 138 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Handsome Near-Gem Ducat with Mirrored King’s Monogram
1112
DENMARK. Ducat, 1691. Copenhagen Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-64. Fr-201; KM-414; Hede-29; Sieg-
102; Schou-8; Bruun-7062. Weight: 3.71 gms. Mintmaster: Christian Wineke (CW). A splendid near-Gem 
Ducat, this handsome exemplar displays bold strike features, with handsome mirrored fields and surfaces 
that befit the assigned grade. As an incredibly appealing example of an uncommon type, this Ducat provides 
an allure that is hard to capture in words.
€4,000-€6,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 163 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 139
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Visually Impressive Near-Gem with Bright Luster Throughout
Considered Unique in Private Hands
1113
DENMARK. Speciedaler, 1691. Copenhagen Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-64. KM-411; Dav-3632; Hede-
66; Sieg-63; Schou-10; Bruun-7063. Weight: 28.80 gms. Mintmaster: Christian Wineke (CW). UNIQUE in 
private hands with only two publicly held in Copenhagen and Stockholm. The very unusual but amusing 
portrait of the king wasn’t exactly flattering, and the EXTREME RARITY and the sublime condition suggest 
that the king opposed to this type being minted for circulation. Beautiful luster coats the surfaces, and the fine 
details are exquisitely impressed. An example that immediately captures one’s attention given the incredible 
state of preservation.
The present example was previously owned by Henrik Henrichsen (1715 -1780), the son of a wealthy Icelandic 
merchant living in Copenhagen. He was academically immensely talented and had a prominent career as a 
jurist, a historian and as a state official. In 1747 he was ennobled under the name Hielmstierne. Hielmstierne, 
who was a member of the Royal Society of London and a number of other prestigious scientific societies, was 
a formidable collector of both coins, medals, paintings, prints and books and assisted in cataloging the coin 
collection of the Danish Kings. His daughter Agnete Marie (1752-1838) donated the library to the Royal Danish 
Library, the art collection to the royal art collections (today the National Gallery), and in 1812 the coin collection 
was sold to king Frederik VI on very favorable terms. Because of dire straits due to the economic crises after the 
Napoleonic wars most were however quickly sold off again to prominent collectors such as Preben Bille-Brahe, C. 
J. Thomsen, H. H. Frost and C. F. Schubart.
€40,000-€60,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: King Frederik VI Collection (Acquired - 1812).
Ex: Henrik Hielmstierne Collection (Private Sale - 1812); published in 1786 as No. 52 in his collection.

========== PAGE 164 ==========

Page 140 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
A Unique and Splendid 5 Ducats in Laudable Condition
1114
DENMARK. 5 Ducats, MDCXCII (1692). Copenhagen Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-64 ★. Fr-142; 
KM-420; Hede-34; Sieg-124; Schou-1; Kold-145a; Bruun-7090. Weight: 17.45 gms. Mintmaster: Christian 
Wineke. Engraver: Anton Meybusch (A.MEIBVS.F .). UNIQUE, presumably a later striking from the original 
dies which are still preserved in the Danish National Museum. Given the uniqueness, this example would 
certainly be in great demand, no matter the grade. The brightly mirrored fields provide pop and contrast 
against which the lightly frosted devices are set. Any signs of marking or handling are of the most cursory 
mention, drawing no attention and certainly not breaking up the appeal. An coin that is nothing short of a 
visual treat in additional to its stature as a numismatic treasure. 
The engraver, Anton Meybusch (born c. 1645 in Essen - died May 2nd 1702 in Copenhagen) was a remarkable 
engraver of both coins and medals, and before coming to Copenhagen in 1691 he had done exquisite works in 
Sweden, Baden-Württemberg, Hamburg and even for three years for the Sun King, Louis XIV of France. Equally 
important to his artistic work were the massive technical improvements that were implemented at the Royal Mint 
in Copenhagen under his direction.
€15,000-€30,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 165 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 141
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Attractive and Fully Presentable Ducat with Good Retained Details
1115
DENMARK. Ducat, 1692. Copenhagen Mint. Christian V . NGC Unc Details—Obverse Scratched.  Fr-
186; KM-418; Hede-32; Sieg-105; Schou-8; Bruun-7097. Weight: 3.46 gms. Mintmaster: Christian Wineke. 
A  VERY RARE type, this appealing Ducat displays a charming Uncirculated appeal, with a full allotment 
of preserved details. The strike quality is attractive, and outside of the scratches on the obverse, there is very 
little evidence of marking. A fully presentable example that will certainly capture much attention, despite the 
slight drawback.
€3,500-€4,500
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 1965 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 166 ==========

Page 142 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Thick and Hefty 2 Krone in Laudable Mint State Condition
1116
DENMARK. 2 Krone, 1693. Copenhagen Mint; mm: Heart. Christian V . NGC MS-61. KM-A430; Hede-
105; Sieg-25; Schou-26; Kold-131b; Bruun-7122. Weight: 35.43 gms. Mintmaster: Christian Wineke. Engraver: 
Anton Meybusch. A type that is somewhat frequently encountered with heavy circulation, the present 
specimen is a notable exception, being tied with one other example for the finest certified representative of the 
type. The coin is supremely attractive, with handsome details and charming multi-hue toning encompassing 
large swathes of the surfaces. A 2 Krone that does not lack for beauty.
€2,500-€3,500
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Alfred Benzon Collection (Copenhagen - 5/1887) Lot # 1171.


========== PAGE 167 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 143
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Stunning Superb Gem Prooflike Ducat
1117
DENMARK. Ducat, 1694. Copenhagen Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-66 Prooflike. Fr-161; KM-433; Hede-
41; Sieg-68; Schou-6; Kold-138c; Bruun-7163. Weight: 3.50 gms. Mintmaster: Christian Wineke. Engraver: 
Anton Meybusch. Brightly lustered and sharply distinctive in its cameo appeal, this Ducat glows with an 
almost entrancing eye appeal. The details are well formed and expressive, and the watery fields are rich with 
sharp reflectivity. Signs of marks or handling are very limited, and scarcely worth a mention. A Prooflike 
example that presents incredibly nicely, and one that is doubtlessly worth a strong bid.
€7,000-€10,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 168 ==========

Page 144 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Lightly Lustrous and Most Beautiful 3 Krone
1118
DENMARK. 3 Krone, 1695. Copenhagen Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-62.  KM-430; Dav-3646; Hede-
101; Sieg-53; Schou-14; Kold-126d; Bruun-7191. Weight: 54.37 gms. Mintmaster: Christian Wineke (CW). 
Engraver: Anton Meybusch. EXTREMELY RARE, with a search yielding no other examples of this date 
trading or being held in private collections. Given this, one might be tempted to take this coin no matter 
the condition, though fortunately that choice is not presented here, with this example being exemplary on 
technical preservation. Soft color has uncoiled itself across the surfaces, and handling is very limited. The 
strike is extremely sharp (despite being rotated prior to a second striking), with no complaints to be raised. 
For the collector looking for a coin that packs a double punch of beauty and scarcity, this piece certainly 
fulfills both requirements.
€12,000-€15,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Carl F. Schubart Collection (Copenhagen - 8/1831) Lot # 1703.


========== PAGE 169 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 145
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Excessively Rare Double Ducat with Handsome Retained Brilliance
One of Only Two Examples Known
1119
DENMARK. 2 Ducats, 1696. Copenhagen Mint. Christian V . NGC AU-55.  Fr-181; KM-446; Hede-47; 
Sieg-79; Schou-4; Bruun-7205. Weight: 7.00 gms. Mintmaster: Christian Wineke. One of only two recorded 
examples, the other one being in the National Museum of Denmark. Although minor marks can be seen in 
the otherwise shimmering fields, the strike and the overall condition is excellent. A truly impressive example 
that presents very well as a nearly-mint piece. 
The dies were engraved for a 1 Ducat (Hede 46) which is also very rare. In the far background below the horse a 
city-view can just be seen.
€12,000-€16,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Peter v. Hemmert Collection (Copenhagen - 2/1807) Lot # 170.

========== PAGE 170 ==========

Page 146 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Attractive and Enticing Near-Gem
Struck for the Danish West India Company
1120
DENMARK. Ducat, 1699. Copenhagen Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-64. Fr-170; KM-453; Hede-53; Sieg-
111; Schou-3; Kold-147c; Bruun-7233. Weight: 3.48 gms. Mintmaster: Christian Wineke. Engraver: Anton 
Meybusch. Condition-wise a marvelous near-Gem of borderline perfection, and on top of that a VERY 
RARE and historically significant piece.
On the stern of the ship lying in front of the Christiansborg fort in Guinea can be seen the initials, DWC (Dansk 
Westindisk Compagnie / Danish West India Company) of the trading company that had commissioned this issue.
The West India Company was formally chartered by King Christian V in 1671. The company administered the 
Danish West Indies until 1754, when it passed to the Danish Government. The company played a vital part 
in the North Atlantic triangular trade where enslaved Africans from the Gold Coast were traded for molasses 
and rum in the West Indies. The Danish West Indies, which were eventually sold to the United States in 1917 
(presently U.S. Virgin Islands), consisted of St. Thomas (settled in 1668), St. John (settled in 1671/1718) and St. 
Croix (bought from the French in 1733).
€12,000-€15,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Peter F. Suhm (Copenhagen - 8/1800) Lot # 128.

========== PAGE 171 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 147
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Entrancing Gold Medallic Issue
Likely Serving as a Warning Against War
1121
DENMARK. Gold Medallic 2 Ducats, ND (1670-99). Copenhagen Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-62.  Fr-
Unlisted; KM-460; Hede-59; Sieg-126; Schou-7; JS-533; Bruun-7240. Weight: 6.91 gms. EXTREMELY RARE 
and with bright golden surfaces and a design that is captivating in its distinctiveness. 
The weight and overall fabric of the piece is consistent with a Double Ducat, but instead of mentioning the 
sovereign in the legend as usual, it reads: FVMO FLAMMA PROXIMA / SED SANGVINE CONSTANT which 
can be translated something like: “Fire follows smoke but the price will be bloody” (partly taken from the “Curculio” 
of Plautus). The obverse shows smoke billowing from a globe and on the reverse is seen a trophy of arms. The real 
intention behind this highly enigmatic piece is unclear but in a time when bloody wars were common it seems to 
have served as a warning that sometimes it is better to back out of a conflict to avoid an escalation.
€10,000-€15,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Hans Henrik Frost Collection (Copenhagen - 3/1827) Lot # 71.
Ex: Lorenz Spengler Collection (Copenhagen - 4/1808) Lot # 5.

========== PAGE 172 ==========

Page 148 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 173 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 149
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Alluring City View Double Ducat with Brilliant Luster
1122
DENMARK. Gold 2 Ducats, ND (1670-99). Copenhagen Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-64.  Fr-204; KM-
458; Hede-56; Sieg-114; Schou-12; Bruun-7243. Weight: 6.87 gms. EXCESSIVELY RARE with only a very 
few in private hands. A genuinely superb jewel of a coin on which the level of detail in the city view makes 
you dream you could be there.
Underneath the text “Hafnia Dania” (Copenhagen - Denmark) is shown a magnificent view of the capital seen 
from the harbor, from which it clearly emerges that it was not without a reason that Copenhagen was dubbed, 
“City of Towers”. The amusing obverse with the personification of the winds blowing from the clouds over a 
monogrammed pyramid, bears the legend: NEC VI NEC METU (“Neither with violence, nor fear”) referring to 
the just reign of the king.
€18,000-€22,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Peter v. Hemmert Collection (Copenhagen - 2/1807) Lot # 192.

========== PAGE 174 ==========

Page 150 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Extremely Pleasing Ducat Offering Bright Luster and Frosted Devices
1123
DENMARK. Ducat, ND (1685). Copenhagen Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-63. Fr-186; KM-374.2; Hede-
12B; Sieg-76; Schou-19; Bruun-7249. Weight: 3.43 gms. Mintmaster: Gregorius Sesemann. Fields gleaming 
with luster and almost frosted devices make this already RARE coin truly exceptional. Details are beautiful 
and impressively applied, with limited instances of actual handling or circulation. 
The initials D.G. in the center of the reverse is an unusually prominent placing of the fact that the absolute 
monarch was king by the grace of God (Dei Gratia).
€4,000-€5,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 175 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 151
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Frederik IV , born in 1671 in Copenhagen, ascended to the throne of Denmark-
Norway in 1699 following the death of his father Christian V . His reign saw 
Denmark-Norway’s participation in various European conflicts, most notably 
the Great Northern War, a two-decades long multinational conflict between 
Russia, Sweden, Denmark-Norway, and Saxony-Poland-Lithuania. Frederik 
sought to assert Danish interests in the Baltic region and reclaim former Dan-
ish possessions. While Sweden came out of the conflict undoubtedly worse off, 
the situation for Denmark wasn’t altogether a landslide victory. Some territo-
rial gains were made, some were lost, and twelve years of war expenditure was 
a heavy burden. 
Trade and culture flourished after the war, and Frederik IV pursued adminis -
trative reforms aimed at modernizing governance and promoting economic 
development. He oversaw the construction of numerous infrastructure proj -
ects, including churches, palaces, and fortifications. 
Frederik IV died in 1730 in Odense on the day after his 59th birthday, and was 
interred in Roskilde Cathedral. 
The lack of large denomination coinage in circulation under Frederik IV is no-
table. He had but one Speciedaler struck in 1704, and Kirsten Bendixen notes in Denmark’s Money that “[d]alers were 
so rare that they were now only used as presents. ”
2 A number of Ducats were minted, though the only pieces minted 
in quantities significant enough to influence circulation were 
the Courant Ducats, which were worth less than the Species-
ducats. The most common coins in circulation were the 8 
Skillings, also called “Wig 8 Skilling” in reference to Frederik’s 
large wig depicted on the obverse. In 1713, Frederik also began 
issuing legal tender notes, which were met largely with suspi-
cion and were ultimately withdrawn after the war.
2Kirsten Bendixen, Denmark’s Money (National Museum of Denmark, 1967), 83.
(REIGNED 1699-1730)
Frederik IV by 
Balthasar Denner (1685–1749)
Meeting of three kings, 1709. Frederik I of Prussia (center), 
August II the Strong, King of Poland and Elector of Saxony (left), 
and Frederik IV of Denmark (right).
FREDERIK IV

========== PAGE 176 ==========

Page 152 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Lightly Circulated and Y et Impressive Dual Portrait 2 Ducats
1124
DENMARK. 2 Ducats, ND (1699). Copenhagen Mint. Frederik IV . NGC AU-58. Fr-209; KM-461; Hede-3; 
Sieg-36; Schou-4; Kold-148c; Bruun-7291. Weight: 6.90 gms. Mintmaster: Christian Wineke. Engraver: Anton 
Meybusch.  A very pleasing example that accentuates the brilliant portraits of Meybusch.  EXTREMELY 
RARE with probably no more than four examples in private ownership. Struck in commemoration of the 
royal succession on August 25th 1699.
Christian V , who was an enthusiastic huntsman, died from injuries that were inflicted upon him by a stag, the 
antlers of which are still preserved in the Royal collection at Rosenborg Castle.
€10,000-€15,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 177 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 153
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Charming and Attractive 2 Ducats with Only Limited Circulation
1125
DENMARK. 2 Ducats, 1701. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik IV . NGC AU-53. Fr-229; KM-475; Hede-8; Sieg-
49; Schou-1; Kold-153; Bruun-7305. Weight: 6.87 gms. Mintmaster: Christian Wineke. Engraver: Anton 
Meybusch. The double-monogram on the reverse is surrounded by the king’s royal motto: DOMINUS MIHI 
ADIUTOR (“The Lord be my helper”). An EXTREMELY RARE type and date with only 3-4 examples resting 
in private collections, the chances to acquire any example are necessarily elusive, making this offering one of 
critical importance to the collector of Danish coins. Brightly lustrous and alluring, this nearly mint 2 Ducats 
displays virtually complete details, with a glossy complexion to the luster.
€20,000-€25,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Peter v. Hemmert Collection (Copenhagen - 2/1807) Lot # 208.

========== PAGE 178 ==========

Page 154 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 179 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 155
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Historically Important 2 Ducats with 
Connection to the Danish Gold Coast Territories
1126
DENMARK. 2 Ducats, 1701. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik IV . NGC MS-60.  Fr-243; cf. KM-476; Hede-
10; Sieg-50; Schou-2; Kold-154; Bruun-7306. Weight: 6.94 gms.  Mintmaster: Christian Wineke. Engraver: 
Anton Meybusch. EXTREMELY RARE, with only a few examples trading at auction in the prior decades, 
this 2 Ducats stands as one of the most popular and desirable of issues from Scandinavia, given the links to 
the Danish colonial empire and the phenomenal reverse design. The surfaces are unimpeachably beautiful, 
displaying all the Mint State appeal that is to be expected from such a grade. The strike is bold and beautiful, 
with no details left wanting across the surfaces. The piece actually presents nicer than the assigned grade, with 
the touch of friction not accompanied by major marking that would be expected at this level. It is no surprise 
that this example far exceeds the traced examples of the type, escaping damage that is unfortunately common 
on gold of this period. A coin that reaches to a numismatic level that few other coins can compete with. 
The reverse shows the Danish fortress, Christiansborg 
on the so-called Gold Coast of Africa (now Ghana) 
seen from the Gulf of Guinea. The Danish Gold Coast 
Territorial Settlements including the five forts were 
sold to the United Kingdom in 1850. This design 
highlights Europe’s colonial interactions with West 
Africa, as a significant amount of the gold used in 
European gold coinage came from the region. The 
British denomination “Guinea” arises from a name of 
the region, with all the major European Powers at one 
time or other taking a colonial interest in the area. 
€10,000-€15,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); 
later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 
2168 in his collection.
Christiansborg Castle situated along the  
Gold Coast of Africa (now Ghana).

========== PAGE 180 ==========

Page 156 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 181 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 157
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Stunning and Immaculate 5 Ducats with Prooflike Surfaces
1127
DENMARK. 5 Ducats, 1704. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik IV . NGC MS-63 Prooflike.  Fr-246; KM-482; 
Hede-12; Sieg-53; Schou-1; Bruun-7327. Weight: 17.12 gms. Mintmaster: Christian Wineke. Mintage: 251. 
Coupling an EXTREME RARITY with a beautiful nautical theme on the reverse, this 5 Ducats reaches 
out and grabs one’s attention in a manner that is hard to describe and touches the aesthetic judgement in 
such a way that only the finest works of art can. The details are so finely engraved they can only be called 
a masterwork, being some of the finest style work seen on any contemporary issue. The strike is resolutely 
impressed, with a bold clarity and nothing that is left to be mentally filled in. The fine details are deeply 
frosted in the richest iciness, which makes them pop from the mirrored fields; as the prooflike designation 
attests to. Marks are seldom encountered, and even the light touches of friction offer little distraction to the 
overall allure and appeal of the piece. The beautiful motif of a ship with its gun-ports open sailing towards 
the sun as well as the legend: CONANDO INVENIMUS (“Daring we win”) seem full of hope for a brilliant 
future and immediately harken one back to the age of Empires and Exploration. A memento worthy of all the 
adulation that can be heaped upon it, and a piece that will stand out even in the most advanced collections, 
as it does in the Bruun Collection.
€80,000-€100,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Alfred Benzon Collection (Copenhagen - 5/1887) Lot # 2128.

========== PAGE 182 ==========

Page 158 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Very Rare Ducat Struck Using African Gold
1128
DENMARK. Ducat, 1704. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik IV . NGC Unc Details—Reverse Cleaned.  Fr-244; 
KM-481; Hede-11A; Sieg-42.1; Schou-4; Bruun-7330. Weight: 3.44 gms. Mintmaster: Christian Wineke. A 
VERY RARE Ducat featuring the Fort Christiansborg on the Gold Coast in West Africa. This example is 
nicely detailed, with no signs of actual handling and the noted cleaning designation arising from some stray 
lines on the reverse. Even though imperfect, this piece is eminently presentable.
€4,000-€6,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 183 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 159
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Handsomely Attractive Near-Gem 
6 Mark with Alluring Color Highlights
1129
DENMARK. 6 Mark (Rejsedaler), 1704. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik IV . NGC MS-64.  KM-479.1; Dav-
1289; NMD-1C; Hede-38; Sieg-23.1; Schou-10; Bruun-7336. Weight: 26.79 gms. Mintmaster: Christian 
Wineke. Struck for the king’s travel to Norway which lasted from the 29th of May until the 5th of September 
1704. This Royal “Travel-Taler” bursts with engrossing eye appeal, delivering rich glossiness throughout the 
flan. Alluring tone is seen interspersed throughout, providing blue, ruby, and auburn highlights. An example 
that has both beauty and history, a formidable combination. Two minor planchet flaws (one on the rim at 12 
o’ clock and one by the D in DAN on the obverse) can be spotted on this interesting variation where the name 
of the king is abbreviated.
The reverse bears an inscription by the famous Danish hymn writer, Thomas Kingo: MOD, TROSKAB, 
DAPPERHED OG HVAD DER GIVER AERE DEN HEELE VERDEN KAND BLANDT NORSKE KLIPPER 
LAERE (Courage, fidelity, bravery and what else brings honor can be learnt among the cliffs of Norway). The 
tradition of striking so-called, “Travel-Talers” in relation to the official royal travels to Norway was continued by 
the following three kings.
€8,000-€12,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 184 ==========

Page 160 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Beautiful Danish West India Company 2 Ducats
1130
DENMARK. Danish West India Company. 2 Ducats, 1708. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik IV . NGC MS-
63. Fr-247; KM-A488; Hede-13; Sieg-51; Schou-1; Bruun-7352. Weight: 6.93 gms. Mintmaster: Christian 
Wineke. A VERY RARE and beautiful type that was struck for the Danish West Indies Company and bearing 
a reverse legend can easily be seen as a glorification of the company itself: METIENDO MARIA AUGEMUR 
(“By sailing the Seas we enrich ourselves”). This interesting historical piece is supplemented by a heaping 
helping of beauty, with the surfaces glowing with a fiery and lustrous sheen. The details are immaculate, with 
a powerful strike and frosting on the devices that gives this piece a nearly prooflike appearance. A coin that 
should unite collectors of Scandinavian and New World coinage, along with those simply seeking a beautiful 
and boastful specimen.
€30,000-€40,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 2213 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 185 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 161
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Glowing Ducat with Commendable Strike Quality
1131
DENMARK. Ducat, 1709. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik IV . NGC MS-62. Fr-212; KM-485; Hede-14; Sieg-
43; Schou-4; Bruun-7360. Weight: 3.46 gms. Mintmaster: Christian Wineke. EXTREMELY RARE with only 
a very few in private collections, this Ducat featuring an alternating pattern of crowned arms and monograms 
delivers a charming eye appeal with rich luster and well articulated details. The nearly Choice surfaces radiate, 
with the overall appearance of the coin being close to a prooflike example. Evidence of marking or handling 
is limited, leaving a wholesome and largely intact surface quality.
€13,000-€16,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 2219 
in his collection.
Ex: Alfred Benzon Collection (Copenhagen - 5/1887) Lot # 2172.
Ex: Johan Andreas Ferdinand Wolff Collection (Copenhagen 3/1882) Lot # 1296.

========== PAGE 186 ==========

Page 162 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Alluring and Barely Circulated Double Ducat of the Highest Rarity
1132
DENMARK. 2 Ducats, 1710. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik IV . NGC AU-58.  Fr-237; KM-498; Hede-19; 
Sieg-48; Schou-1; Bruun-7361. Weight: 6.93 gms. Mintmaster: Christian Wineke. Apart from this example, 
only the one in the National Museum of Denmark has so far been registered, highlighting the EXTREME 
RARITY, and consequently, demand for the date. The present Ducat is pleasingly detailed, with only light 
touches of circulation and nearly complete details. A reserved canary yellow color is seen on the surfaces, 
giving this piece a distinguished appeal and appearance.
€20,000-€25,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 187 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 163
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Alluring Near-Gem Gold 16 Skilling Stuck to Ducat Weight Standard
1133
DENMARK. Gold 16 Skilling (2 Ducats), 1713. Copenhagen Mint; mm: Heart. Frederik IV . NGC MS-
64. Fr-Unlisted; KM-Unlisted; Hede-47; Sieg-15; Schou-1a; Bruun-7396. Weight: 6.93 gms. Mintmaster: 
Christian Wineke (CW). An intriguing and VERY RARE type, featuring a gold planchet struck to a Double 
Ducat weight standard with the dies customarily used for a 16 Skilling. The luster on this example is bright, 
with a stunning glossy appeal that dances in the light. The details are crisply laid, with no evidence of weakness 
or defect in strike. Only one further example in gold has been traced, as lot 77 in Bruun Rasmussen Auction 
910 (November 2022) which realized a final hammer price of 420,000 DKK (roughly 56,000 EUR).
€40,000-€50,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection (acquired in Hamburg).

========== PAGE 188 ==========

Page 164 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Bright and Brilliant Gem that Tops the Population Report
1134
DENMARK. 1/2 Courant Ducat (Rixdaler), 1715. Copenhagen Mint; mm: Heart. Frederik IV . NGC 
MS-65. Fr-222; KM-510; Hede-33; Sieg-25; Schou-2; Bruun-7423. Weight: 1.44 gms. Mintmaster: Christian 
Wineke (CW). Mintage: 598. A seldom encountered type, especially when considering the elevated grade 
status of the piece, with this piece being the sole specimen to reach the MS-65 threshold. The surfaces glow 
with an engaging effervescence of gold, marks are exceedingly difficult to pick out, even under magnification.
€2,500-€3,500
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Julius Gustav Berger Klemp Collection (Copenhagen - 1891) Lot # 374.
Ex: Possibly King Frederik VII.

========== PAGE 189 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 165
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Boldly Designed Krone from a Mintage of 60 Pieces
Presumably Struck Using Norwegian Silver from Kongsberg
1135
DENMARK. Krone, 1723. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik IV . NGC MS-60.  KM-523; Dav-1290; Hede-39; 
Sieg-19; Schou-2; Bruun-7518. Weight: 22.36 gms. Mintmaster: Christian Wineke (CW). Engraver: Olav Wif. 
Purported Mintage: 60. An EXTREMELY RARE date in enviable condition, this stunningly beautiful Krone 
delivers a magnificent appeal, with a bold strike and soft gleaming luster. Touches of handsome toning are 
seen in some protected design areas, with punctuating color supporting the general appeal of the example.
Although struck in Copenhagen, the dies were engraved by Olav Wif, who worked at Kongsberg from 1723 until 
1730. It is presumably struck from Norwegian silver found in a newly found silver mine at Kongsberg named 
after queen Anna Sophia.
€6,000-€8,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Ove T. Thomsen (Copenhagen - 10/1880) Lot # 3716.

========== PAGE 190 ==========

Page 166 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Handsome 3 Krone with Only the Faintest Touches of Circulation
1136
DENMARK. 3 Krone, 1726. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik IV . NGC AU-55. KM-525; Dav-1293; Hede-41; 
Sieg-22; Schou-2; Bruun-7524. Weight: 67.37 gms. Mintmaster: Christian Wineke. Engraver: Peter Berg. 
Conditionally elusive, this attractive 3 Krone delivers a splendid appeal, with only light touches of wear and 
soft gleaming allure. The strike is essentially faultless, with the intricate design being executed at a high level. 
The oblique milling on the edge confirms this piece’s status as an original striking, as later restrikes from the 
original dies can be distinguished on account of having a smooth edge.
€10,000-€12,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.


========== PAGE 191 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 167
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Artfully Designed and Glowing Near-Gem 1/2 Ducat
1137
DENMARK. 1/2 Ducat, ND (1699-1730). Copenhagen Mint. Frederik IV . NGC MS-64★. Fr-241; KM-452; 
Hede-25; Sieg-29; Schou-13; Bruun-7557. Weight: 1.81 gms. Mintmaster: Christian Wineke. EXTREMELY 
RARE with only a very few in private hands, this fractional Ducat generates a tremendous eye appeal, with 
bright luster and an essentially prooflike finish. The well laid details are deeply frosted, with bold contrast 
between open field and design. Exceedingly alluring, as evidenced by the “star” modifier, highlighting 
exceptional eye appeal.
€8,000-€12,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 192 ==========

Page 168 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Christian VI was born in 1699 in Copenhagen to King Frederik IV and his first 
wife Louise of Mecklenburg-Güstrow. He was crowned King of Denmark-Norway, 
along with his wife Sophie Magdalene of Brandenburg-Kulmbach who became 
Queen, in 1730 following the death of his father Frederik. Described by most his -
torical sources as naturally introverted, anxious, and deeply religious, Christian 
VI’s reign is associated with the growing Pietist movement, which emphasized bib-
lical doctrine and a strong sense of personal piety. His relationship with the popu-
lace was never friendly, and court life under his reign is persistently characterized 
as quiet, religious, and distant. It is, however, exceedingly clear that he took his 
duties very seriously – his adopted motto “Deo et Populo” (for God and my people) 
embodies his feelings on his role as an autocrat. 
Christian VI was the first Danish monarchs of the early modern period who had 
the distinction of not fighting a war with Sweden; indeed, in 1742 he signed the 
Treaty of San Ildefonso which, although later nullified, improved relations between 
the two countries. 
With no wars to finance during his reign, Christian VI spent lavishly on building 
projects throughout his time in power, which included the construction of Chris-
tiansborg Palace, Hirschholm Palace, and the Eremitage. He built the Prince’s Palace for his son (the future King 
Frederik V) which houses the National Museum of Denmark today.
Christian VI died in 1746 in Hirschholm Palace in Copenhagen, and is interred in Roskilde Cathedral. 
Christian VI’s reign gives us few types to peruse, with Ducats struck only occasionally for use by the West India 
Company, only one type of Krone struck, and no Speciedalers struck. The 1732 Kronerigsdaler was issued to cele-
brate the King’s visit to Norway, though the trip actually took place in 1733 after being postponed. The Kurantbanken 
was established in 1736 and was authorized by its royal charter to issue banknotes as legal tender for the state, which 
were fully convertible into coin. Though the early notes proved far too easy to counterfeit, in 1748 notes with printed 
denominations were issued and the old ones withdrawn from circulation.
(REIGNED 1730-1746)
Christian VI by 
Johann Salomon Wahl (1689–1765) 
The Prince’s Palace in Copenhagen, which houses
the National Museum of Denmark today.
CHRISTIAN VI

========== PAGE 193 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 169
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Handsome and Bright Near-Gem Delivering Vibrant Luster
1138
DENMARK. Ducat, 1732. Copenhagen Mint. Christian VI. NGC MS-63+. Fr-249; KM-540; Hede-2; Sieg-
8; Schou-1; Bruun-7568. Weight: 3.49 gms. Mintmaster: Christian Wineke. Engraver: Georg Wilhelm Wahl. 
Sharply struck and most desirous, this alluring Choice Ducat does not lack for eye appeal. Soft glossy luster 
wafts from the flan when held in the light, and evidence of contact marks or wispy handling is exceedingly 
limited. Featuring a reverse legend of “DEO ET POPVLO” (“God and the people”), the king’s royal motto, this 
Ducat has an added appeal. A Ducat that is short on faults, and not lacking for distinctions.
€6,000-€8,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 194 ==========

Page 170 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 195 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 171
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Appealing Plus Graded Kronerigsdaler with Steely Brilliance
Net Mintage: 11
1139
DENMARK. Kronerigsdaler (6 Mark), 1732. Copenhagen Mint. Christian VI. NGC MS-64+. KM-539; 
Dav-1295; NMD-1; Hede-5; Sieg-6; Schou-2; Bruun-7569. Weight: 26.84 gms. Mintmaster: Christian Wineke. 
Engraver: Georg Wilhelm Wahl. This enticing nearly-Gem “Travel-Taler” is detailed with a razor-sharp 
clarity that is cutting with precision. Light brilliance glows off the flan, with touches of onyx color mottled 
throughout. As one of the rarest dated “travel-talers” interest should be strong, especially when considering 
the stunning condition. 
The EXTREME RARITY of this Travel-Taler (Rejsedaler) arises from the king’s travel to Norway, originally 
planned for 1732, being postponed to the following year. Of the approximately 4,500 originally minted, almost 
all were melted except for 11 examples. A little over half of these have survived, with only three confirmed in 
private collections.
€40,000-€60,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: King Frederik VI Collection (Acquired - 1812).
Ex: Henrik Hielmstierne Collection (Private Sale - 1812); published in 1786 as No. 2 in his collection.

========== PAGE 196 ==========

Page 172 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Splendid Ducat with Tremendous Reverse
Displaying Fort Christiansborg
1140
DENMARK. Ducat, 1738. Copenhagen Mint. Christian VI. NGC MS-63.  Fr-248; KM-542; Hede-3; 
Sieg-9; Schou-1; Bruun-7585. Weight: 3.47 gms. Mintmaster: Christian Wineke. A transfixing Ducat, this 
representative featuring an intriguing reverse motif of Fort Christiansborg, with the crowned monogram of 
Christian VI on the obverse; a change of pace as most Danish gold contemporary with this example feature a 
portrait of the ruler. Beautiful, vibrant luster provides a reflective luster reminiscent of a mirror. Altogether, a 
representative deserving of an exultant position in the next cabinet it enters.
At the time a stronghold for the Danish Atlantic slave trade, the fortress still stands and was until 2008 the 
presidential palace of Ghana.
€3,500-€4,500
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 197 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 173
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Frederik V , the only son of King Christian VI and Queen Sophie Magdalene, 
was born in 1723 and ascended to the throne in 1746 after the death of his 
father. In stark contrast with his father, Frederik’s court was known to be fes-
tive and much more relaxed than it had been under the solemnly religious 
Christian VI. Frederik himself was a sociable character; many accounts of his 
life describe him as a hedonist with a strong appetite for alcohol at best, and a 
debaucherous rake at worst.
Frederik relied heavily on his ministers to administer the duties of the mon -
archy, and his reign was one of peace; Denmark-Norway narrowly managed 
to stay neutral during the Seven Y ears’ War, which involved most of the great 
European nations, including Sweden. 
Arts and science flourished under Frederik V; the Royal Danish Theatre was 
founded in 1748 and the Royal Frederiks Hospital was built in Copenha-
gen beginning in 1752, where it stood until 1910. Commercial progress was 
made with the establishment of the gunpowder plant and cannon foundry in 
Frederiksværk, which became the basis of the first large-scale domestic indus-
trial enterprise.
Frederik’s alcoholism and indulgent lifestyle took a toll on his health and he 
died in 1766 at the age of 42 in Copenhagen. After lying in state with great 
pomp, he was interred next to Queen Louise in Roskilde Cathedral.
Paper money continued to dominate the daily retail circulation in the country, with one important change made in 
1757—notes were no longer convertible to coin and were to be used as legal tender. Huge amounts of Courant Duc-
ats were struck in reaction to the possibility of war and should the need to pay soldiers arise. The magnificent rococo 
style Specieducats struck at the beginning of Frederik’s reign were minted in small quantities; their dies were cut by 
the exceptional Court medallist Magnus Gustavus Arbien.
(REIGNED 1746-1766)
Frederik V by 
Carl Gustaf Pilo (1711–1793)
FREDERIK V
King Frederik V is hailed by Denmark and Norway.
The Royal Collection of Graphic Art.

========== PAGE 198 ==========

Page 174 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Extremely Impressive 2 Ducats
Featuring the Busts of Both Frederik V and Christian VI
Splendidly Graded with Both Plus and Star Designations by NGC
1141
DENMARK. 2 Ducats, ND (1746). Copenhagen Mint. Frederik V . NGC MS-65+ ★. Fr-251; KM-553; 
Hede-2A; Sieg-23.1; Schou-1; Bruun-7601. Weight: 6.96 gms. Mintmaster: Christian Wineke. Engraver: 
Magnus Gustavus Arbien (A). EXTREMELY RARE with only a very few in private hands, this stunning 
Double Ducat honoring the accession of Frederik V features a bust of Frederik V counterposed against a bust 
of the recently deceased Christian VI. This incredible dual portrait Ducat delivers entrancing brilliance, with 
deep reflective luster pooling in the open fields and hard frosted devices. Finding even a single stray hit or 
mark is a herculean task, with this golden beauty being both a premium for the grade example, as well as one 
with tremendous eye appeal for the grade.
As was customary the deceased king is wearing laurels, a tradition that continued on the Danish accession pieces 
through 1863.
€15,000-€20,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 2460 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 199 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 175
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Stunning 2 Ducats Struck with Gold from Imperial China
1142
DENMARK. 2 Ducats, 1746. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik V . NGC MS-65★. Fr-253; KM-555; Hede-4A; 
Sieg-25.1; Schou-4; Bruun-7604. Weight: 6.97 gms. Mintmaster: I. M. Wineke. Engraver: Magnus Gustavus 
Arbien (A). Of the HIGHEST RARITY, this most pleasing Double Ducat features an appeal that combines 
occident and orient. The beautiful flan struck on Chinese gold displays impressive details, with bright details 
that are sparkling with frosty luster. The fields shine, and finding even a single fault is difficult. About as 
alluring as one could ever expect an example of this desirable type, and as such, a piece that will generate 
enthusiasm from across the numismatic spectrum.  
As the text, EX AURO SINICO (“From Chinese gold”) reveals, this type was stuck from Chinese gold traded 
for silver by the Danish Asiatic Company acting under protection by the king (REGALIBUS AUSPICIIS). The 
Danish Asiatic Company was the successor to the Danish East India Company founded in 1730, and began trade 
with Qing China at Canton. Traveling through the Danish outposts on the Indian Subcontinent, the Danish 
Asiatic Company found little success and lost its monopoly on Danish trade with the Orient in 1772. All former 
outposts became crown colonies a few years later, ending the brief run of the Company.  
€15,000-€30,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 200 ==========

Page 176 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Stunning Gem Mint Double Ducat from
Chinese Gold Featuring a Galley
1143
DENMARK. 2 Ducats, 1746. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik V . NGC MS-65.  Fr-257; KM-556; Hede-6; 
Sieg-27; Schou-5; Bruun-7605. Weight: 6.91 gms. Mintmaster: I. M. Wineke. Engraver: Magnus Gustavus 
Arbien (A). It goes without saying that this Double Ducat produced from gold sourced by the Danish Asiatic 
Trading Company from Qing China is EXTREMELY RARE. The reverse features the banner of the Asiatic 
Company set upon a Roman style galley, presenting an artful and stylized rendition of work of the Danish 
Asiatic Company. This Gem glitters with a notable brilliance, with enticing frosting on the devices and nicely 
mirrored fields. Some copper spots are noted on this tremendous Gem example of a type that should suffer 
no shortage of popularity.
€15,000-€30,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 201 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 177
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Glorious 1746-A Double Ducat
Displaying an Intricate Reverse of Fort Christiansborg
Unique in Private Collections
1144
DENMARK. 2 Ducats, 1746. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik V . NGC MS-64. Fr-263; KM-558; Hede-8; Sieg-29; 
Schou-6; Bruun-7606. Weight: 6.96 gms. Mintmaster: I. M. Wineke. Engraver: Magnus Gustavus Arbien (A). 
One of only two traced examples, with the other one being in the National Museum of Denmark. The elegantly 
composed reverse very unusually bears a legend in Danish instead of Latin, as “FRA CHRISTIANSBORG” 
means “From Christiansborg” i. e. referring to a scene from the harbor facing the fortress of Christiansborg on 
the cost of Guinea and reflected in the intricately detailed depiction of a ship leaving the fort. All considered, 
this near-Gem can certainly claim a position amongst the loftiest of European Ducats, being finely engraved 
and meticulously struck.
€15,000-€20,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Peter v. Hemmert (Copenhagen - 2/1807) Lot # 281.

========== PAGE 202 ==========

Page 178 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Beautiful Near-Gem Speciedaler with Rich Luster
1145
DENMARK. Speciedaler, 1747. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik V . NGC MS-64. KM-562; Dav-1299; Hede-25; 
Sieg-16; Schou-12; Bruun-7623. Weight: 29.03 gms. Mintmaster: I. M. Wineke. Engraver: Magnus Gustavus 
Arbien (A). This especially attractive Speciedaler commemorating the anointment of Frederik V displays an 
intricate obverse featuring the new king enthroned. Brilliant glossiness shimmers and sheens from the flan, 
and any traces of marking are limited and unobtrusive. An example befitting the most regal of collections. 
Disregarding the essentially German Zweidrittel struck for Christian V in Oldenburg, this is interestingly only the 
second Danish coinage to feature the two wild men shield supporters, the first being the impressive Broad Talers 
(breddalere) of Christian IV , presumably struck ca. 1607-09, 140 years earlier.
€3,000-€4,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 203 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 179
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Stunning 6 Mark Offering in Premium Gem Quality with Alluring Luster
1146
DENMARK. 6 Mark (Rejsedaler), 1749. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik V . NGC MS-66+.  KM-575; Dav-
1301B; NMD-1B; Hede-33B; Sieg-15.2; Schou-4; Bruun-7641. Weight: 27.17 gms. Mintmaster: Ingeborg 
Maria Wineke. Engraver: Johann Heinrich Wahl (W). This bright premium Gem delivers a shiny effervescence 
of bright luster, with a brilliant strike and limited flecks of mottled color and bright toning throughout. Struck 
as a “Travel Taler” (rejsedaler) for the king and his entourage for his journey to and stay in Norway in the 
summer of 1749, this piece has all the appeal and allure of freshly minted coin. No signs of marks or handling 
are seen, with a wholly engrossing eye appeal and allure, paying a fitting tribute to the type.
Desired by Norwegian and Danish collectors alike, the “Travel Talers” have long been coveted pieces.
€6,000-€8,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 204 ==========

Page 180 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Exceptional Gem Deep Prooflike Ducat of Frederik V
The Only Example Certified of the Date by NGC
1147
DENMARK. Ducat, 1756. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik V . NGC MS-65 Deep Prooflike. Fr-268; KM-583; 
Hede-19; Sieg-40; Schou-1; Bruun-7657. Weight: 3.50 gms. Mintmaster: Peter Nicolai van Hauen (VH). 
Engraver: Magnus Gustavus Arbien. Perhaps the single most impressive survivor extant from this three year 
type, this magnificent Ducat displays stunning reflective qualities in the fields, while the designs are laden 
with the utmost frost. An absolute treasure to behold, the strike is also entirely complete, with the popular 
ship motif on the reverse seemingly floating atop the surfaces.
Bearing a symbolic reverse, the ship design on this type designates that the gold used to coin this piece was 
acquired from overseas. The Latin legend, “DUCE PRUDENTIA, CONSTANTIA COMITE”, which has roots in 
religious teachings, can be translated as “With Wisdom as a Guide, Perseverance as a Companion”.
€7,000-€10,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 205 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 181
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Fabulous Prooflike 12 Mark with Sharp Cameo-like Distinction
1148
DENMARK. 12 Mark (Courant Ducat), 1765. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik V . NGC MS-66 Prooflike. Fr-
269; KM-587.7; Hede-22G; Sieg-21.7; Schou-1; Bruun-7728. Weight: 3.10 gms. Mintmaster: Hans Schierven 
Knoph (HSK). Engraver: Daniel Jensen Adzer (DIA), who engraved a large number of medals but is known 
to have engraved only two coins: this and the Speciedaler from 1764 (Hede 27B). Quite the RARE Ducat, 
this tremendous example displays bright luster and a mirrored brilliance that is rather commendable. A 
slight prooflike appearance besets the surfaces, with gentle frosting on the devices in addition to the mirrored 
brilliance. Only a few light marks are seen on the surfaces, with sunny and unbroken allure. 
A popular coinage among collectors and the largest pre-decimal gold mintage in Denmark, the Courant Ducats 
were minted for two reasons: firstly there was a shortage in silver due to the war between Saxony and Prussia, 
which involved several other countries at the time. Secondly the Death of empress Elizabeth of Russia elevated 
Carl Peter Ulrich, duke of Holstein-Gottorp to the Russian throne (as Peter III), and he was, even more than 
Elizabeth, a mortal enemy of Denmark due to the conflicts of interest in Schleswig. The coins were simply needed 
to pay the troops in case war broke out. It was only the surprising overthrowing of Carl Peter Ulrich by his wife, 
Catherine the Great, quickly followed by his death, that prevented the war.
€5,000-€7,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 206 ==========

Page 182 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Christian VII was born 29 January 1749 in the Queen’s Bedchamber at Christians-
borg Palace, the fourth child and second son of the reigning monarch of Den -
mark-Norway, King Frederik V , and his first wife Louise of Great Britain. The first 
born son of King Frederik had died in infancy two years earlier, making Christian 
Crown Prince from birth.
Christian VII’s reign was marked by his mental illness and instability, which meant 
that he effectively ruled in name only, leaving the bulk of administration to his 
ministers. He ascended the throne in 1766 at the age of 16 and married his cousin 
Princess Caroline Matilda of Great Britain that same year. Johann Friedrich Stru-
ensee, Christian’s personal physician, served as de facto regent from 1770-1772, 
introducing many progressive social reforms during his tenure and also entering 
into an affair with Queen Caroline; Princess Louise was generally accepted as the 
daughter of Struensee. As with so many influential regents and advisors through -
out history, the tide eventually turned against Struensee and he, along with Queen 
Matilda, was arrested in 1772 for allegedly usurping royal authority. The king 
officially divorced Queen Matilda, exiling her to Celle Castle in Hanover where  
she died a few years later; Struensee was decapitated, quartered, an put on a break-
ing wheel.
Christian VII’s reign saw the many social reforms enacted during the Struensee administration, but was also asso-
ciated with the Theatre War, the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars, and the beginning of the Napoleonic 
Wars.
In 1784, the Crown Prince Frederik reached his legal majority of 16 years and seized the power of the regency. He 
continued to rule through the regency until the death of his father King Christian VII in 1808, when he could of -
ficially claim the throne.
Large quantities of Speciedalers were struck during the reign of King Christian VII, as well as the ½, ¼, ⅔, ⅓, and 
¹�15 Speciedalers. The striking of the Piastre in the 1770s was undertaken to produce a trade dollar on par with the 
Spanish Colonial pillar dollars that circulated widely at the time. The Dano-Norwegian Specie Bank was established 
in 1791, bringing general improvements to the nation’s coinage and their regulations.
The last Krone coins before the institution of the modern 
Krone system were struck to mark the occasion of the 
king’s birthday in 1771. The gold coins of this period mir-
ror their foreign contemporaries in design, like the new 
Christian d’Or intended for use abroad that was based 
upon the French Louis d’Or. For the first time in Danish 
history, copper began to be used extensively in the na -
tion’s coinage, and Skillings and Half Skillings from this 
period can be found in most private collections.
(REIGNED 1766-1808)
Christian VII by 
Alexander Roslin (1718–1793)
Christian VII marries his cousin 
Princess Caroline Matilda of Great Britain, 1766.
CHRISTIAN VII

========== PAGE 207 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 183
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Impressive Gem Speciedaler Struck at the Rethwisch Mint
1149
DENMARK. Speciedaler, 1769. Rethwisch Mint. Christian VII. NGC MS-65. KM-607; Dav-1305; Hede-
7; Sieg-35; Schou-1; FP-E6; Bruun-7748. Weight: 28.87 gms. Mintmaster: Hans Schierven Knoph (HSK). 
Engraver: Johan Ephraim Bauert (B). Mintage: 51. Bauert’s portrait of King Christian VII is one of the most 
stylistically beautiful works of engraving, with the full richness of detail in the armored and gartered bust 
evident. This example does that engraving much justice, being struck on a highly engaging and lustrous 
flan that has escaped the ravages of time, being pleasingly free of handling and marking. Of the 51 examples 
that were minted, one was deposited in the Royal Coin Cabinet and the remaining 50 given to the wealthy 
merchant and statesman, baron von Schimmelmann. This lineage has ensured the survival of this piece in 
such pristine condition, and it is likely amongst the best examples one could ever hope to locate.
Rethwisch castle was located between Lübeck and Hamburg in Holstein. The Rethwisch Mint, a subsidiary to the 
Royal Mint in Copenhagen, operated for only three years, 1768-1770, when it was moved to Altona. All the coins 
minted at Rethwisch are considered among the most beautiful of Danish coins.
$10,000-$12,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 208 ==========

Page 184 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Extremely Lustrous and Conditionally Rare Speciedaler
1150
DENMARK. Speciedaler, 1771. Copenhagen Mint. Christian VII. NGC MS-64+.  KM-623; Dav-1307; 
Hede-11A; Sieg-23.1; Schou-4; FP-36; Bruun-7757. Weight: 29.09 gms. Mintmaster: Hans Schierven Knoph 
(HSK). Engraver: Johan Ephraim Bauert. Topping the NGC population report, this Speciedaler is richly 
lustrous and appealing, with sharp strike quality and alluring brilliance throughout. Touches of handsome 
tone support the argent brilliance, with a nice mottled contrast. A stunning example that will doubtlessly 
capture the attention of many collectors of conditional rarities.
€4,000-€6,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 209 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 185
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
A Premium Gem Example that is the Sole Finest Certified by NGC
1151
DENMARK. Christian d’Or, 1775. Altona Mint. Christian VII. NGC MS-66. Fr-279; KM-629; Hede-5B; 
Sieg-30.2; Schou-1; FP-48.3; Bruun-7784. Weight: 6.67 gms. Mintmaster: Hans Schierven Knoph and Caspar 
Henrich Lyng. Engraver: Johan Henrik Wolff. This appealing Gem delivers bright luster, with sharp alluring 
details and brilliant reflectivity. No immediate signs of handling or marking are seen, with the surfaces being 
of a superior caliber. An impressive piece that surmounts all others, being the sole finest graded example yet 
certified by NGC.
The finely engraved reverse was designed by the famous Danish court sculptor, Johannes Wiedewelt (1731-1802), 
and delivers all the appeal and charm of his best sculptures. 
€7,000-€10,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 210 ==========

Page 186 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 211 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 187
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Stunning Example of the Very Rare “Greenland” Dollar
One of the Most Popular Norwegian Coins
1152
NORW AY . Danish Asiatic Company. “Greenland” Dollar (Piastre), 1777. Kongsberg Mint. Christian 
VII. NGC MS-62.  KM-639.2; Dav-412A; NMD-100; Hede-9; Sieg-15; Schou-3; FP-33.2; Salvesen-52; 
Bruun-7789. Weight: 27.04 gms. Mintmaster: Hans Jacob Arnold Branth. Engravers: Gabriel Andersen 
Lunder, Anders Jonsen Lunde. These hefty Piastres are RARE and seldom come to market, making them 
highly sought after when they do. It is doubly rare when they are preserved anywhere near this nicely, with 
this example surpassing all others on the NGC census. The surfaces are bright and lustrous, with only the 
lightest glimpses of contact seen occasionally. As such a tremendous representative of this always in demand 
type, this example figures to be amongst the highlights of the sale, and a welcome addition to any collection 
of Scandinavian coinage, World Crowns, or Trade Coinage. 
Of all the world crowns, few have the magnetism and weighty importance of the Danish Asiatic Company 
“Greenland” Dollar. Produced to function as trade coinage, and modeled after the dominant Trade Dollar of the 
period, the Spanish Colonial Eight Reales which provided clear design inspiration. While produced primarily for 
export to the Orient, the coin features banners representing Greenland, Iceland, and the Faroe Islands, generating 
the misnomer. 
The inclusion in the Danish section of the catalog is due to the original numbering in the 1928 catalog which was 
essentially based on H. H. Schou’s reference work. Presumably due to the fact that the Piaster quite exceptionally 
doesn’t have the Kongsberg mintmark of the two crossed hammers, it wasn’t listed under Norway. For cogency we 
have, however, chosen to honor the original listing.
€80,000-€120,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Peter v. Hemmert (Copenhagen - 2/1807) Lot # 1862.

========== PAGE 212 ==========

Page 188 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Stunningly Appealing and Exceptional 
Speciedaler that Approaches Perfection
1153
DENMARK. Schleswig-Holstein. Speciedaler, 1788. Altona Mint. Christian VII. NGC MS-67+.  KM-
138.2; Dav-1311; Hede-39B; Sieg-45.2; Schou-4; FP-9.3; Bruun-7889. Weight: 28.88 gms. Mintmaster; 
Michael Flor (MF). Engraver: David Ahron Jacobsen (DI). Without a doubt one of the most impressive pieces 
conditionally in the Bruun Collection, this Superb-Gem offers a stunning allure, with unmarked fields and a 
soft luster. Some light tone is seen at the peripheries, with a few flecks of deep color throughout. A piece that 
defies words, and is a fitting tribute to Jacobsen, who only engraved Talers in Altona in 1787 and 1788. One 
could scarcely imagine another example of his handiwork being preserved this nicely. The portrait is very 
unusual in rendering the king with a slight smile on his lips.
€2,500-€5,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 213 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 189
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Stunning Ducat with Sharp Contrast and an As-Made Appearance
1154
DENMARK. Ducat, 1794. Altona Mint. Christian VII. NGC MS-67.  Fr-283; KM-650; Hede-2; Sieg-29; 
Schou-1; FP-47.4; Bruun-7913. Weight: 3.49 gms. Mintmaster: Michael Flor. Engraver: Georg Bauert. The 
so-called “Wildman Ducat” was the last Danish Ducat produced and the only one which gives the exact 
weight and fineness in the design, suiting it for international trade. Despite the ducat’s intended function 
of facilitating international trade, the present specimen clearly avoided any such usage and is as beautiful 
and charming as the day it was made. The Superb-Gem luster glows with a cutting appeal, with a sharp 
prooflike appearance arising from frosty details and deeply mirrored fields, particularly on the obverse. A 
piece that is at the pinnacle of beauty, both in design and preservation, and as such, a representative worthy 
of consideration from even the choosiest collectors.
€6,000-€8,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 214 ==========

Page 190 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Dazzling Gem Example of this Unusual Christian VII Portrait Type
1155
DENMARK. Speciedaler, 1799. Copenhagen Mint. Christian VII. NGC MS-65+.  KM-654; Dav-1315; 
Hede-13D; Sieg-25.4; Schou-2; FP-43.6; Bruun-7940. Weight: 28.83 gms. Mintmaster: Hans Jacob Arnold 
Branth (HIAB). Engraver: Peter  (Pietro) Leonard Gianelli (PG). Displaying superb detail through the designs 
with frosty luster that sparkles in the fields. A touch of gold tone adorns the edges and provides a pleasing 
accent to the appearance. Altogether, a dazzling example of this highly unusual one-year portrait type which 
is certainly among the finest extant.
Trained as a sculptor by renowned Danish artist Nicolai Abildgaard, Pietro Gianelli is credited for numerous 
medallic and coinage works throughout his career, the best known of which is a medal struck to commemorate 
the Danish abolition of the slave trade in 1792.
€2,000-€4,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.


========== PAGE 215 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 191
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Entrancingly Engraved and Wonderfully Executed
Christian d’Or in Premium Gem Condition
1156
DENMARK. Christian d’Or, ND (1771). Altona Mint. Christian VII. NGC MS-66.  Fr-279; KM-629; 
Hede-5A; Sieg-30.1; Schou-1; FP-48.1; Bruun-7983. Weight: 6.67 gms. Mintmaster: Hans Schivern Knoph. 
Engraver: Johan Henrik Wolff (W) from a design by Johannes Wiedewelt. A marvelously attractive premium 
Gem, this Christian d’Or displays bright luster and sharply delineated details throughout. A piece largely 
without discernible fault, and as such, a golden example that stands near the pinnacle of desirability and 
attractiveness. 
This coin marks the beginning of the Christian and Frederik d’ or coinage which continued up until decimalization 
in 1873. The coins were intended for and mainly used in international transactions, and all are coveted by 
collectors in Denmark and abroad.
€10,000-€15,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 216 ==========

Page 192 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Frederik VI, born to King Christian VII and Queen Caroline Matilda in January 
1768, was officially crowned King of Denmark-Norway in 1808 upon the death of 
his father, though he had been serving as the regent since 1784, due to his father’s 
mental incompetence. He was the last monarch to serve as king of the united 
Denmark-Norway. His early reign was characterized by liberal reforms, like the 
abolition of serfdom in 1788, no doubt informed by the spirit of his Enlighten -
ment upbringing. 
Frederik presided over a challenging period marked by war, economic turmoil, 
and significant political change. His reign began during the Napoleonic Wars, 
and while he initially attempted to remain neutral, attacks from Great Britain 
forced him to ally with Napoleon. After suffering defeat in 1814, Denmark was 
forced to cede Norway to Sweden under the Treaty of Kiel.
After the war, Frederik VI faced the task of rebuilding and modernizing Denmark 
at home. He implemented reforms aimed at improving agriculture, education, 
and infrastructure, laying the groundwork for Denmark’s transition to a more 
industrialized society in the 19th century. He also promoted cultural initiatives, 
supporting the arts and sciences, ushering in a period of cultural flourishing that 
bloomed into what became known as the Danish Golden Age.
In 1834, Frederik set up four consultative provincial assemblies, the Assemblies of the Estate, marking the beginning 
of parliamentary life in Denmark. Frederik VI died in 1839, leaving no surviving sons to inherit the throne, which 
passed to his half-cousin Christian (his father’s half-brother’s son).
The period of Frederik’s reign saw economic difficulties as a result of the country’s participation in the Napoleonic 
Wars. In a desperate effort to obtain silver for coinage, the people were encouraged to hand in silver plate—thus was 
born the “offering mark, ” or 1/16 Rigsdaler that bore the motto “Voluntary Offering to the Fatherland 1808. ”  
Large scale copper coinage began around this time in an effort to ease the situation. The first of these issues were 
minted using the copper from the roof of the Church of Our Lady that had collapsed during the bombardment of 
Copenhagen in 1807. The attempts to keep these in circulation ultimately failed, and by 1813 the State was bankrupt, 
necessitating a reorganization of the coinage. The Rigsbankdaler was the principal coin of this reorganization. Some 
gold coins were issued during his later reign, typically used for foreign payments and not for general use in Denmark.
(REIGNED 1808-1839)
Frederik VI by 
Friedrich Carl Gröger (1766–1838)
FREDERIK VI
Union between Norway and Sweden. 
The Norwegian Constituent Assembly at Eidsvoll, 1814.

========== PAGE 217 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 193
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Expressive and Beautiful Specimen Strike with Much Die Polishing
1157
DENMARK. Rigsbankdaler, 1813. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik VI. NGC SPECIMEN-66.  KM-683.1; 
Hede-24A; Sieg-26.1; Schou-1; Bruun-8025. Weight: 14.42 gms. Mintmaster: Ole Varberg. Engraver: 
Christian Andreas Müller (M). Bearing all the evidence of a special strike, this Rigsbankdaler displays a most 
beautiful essence. The surfaces overrun with much effuse die polish, and the bright luster captures the eye 
when rotated in light. Vibrant and wholesome color is seen, being particularly forceful at the peripheries. The 
rims are squared off and the details display commendable strike quality. A thoroughly appealing example, 
and one that should raise any collector’s level of excitement.
This is the only known coin type engraved by Christian Andreas Müller (1783-1877), and the present example 
should clearly be seen as a trial strike. Müller wasn’t given a permanent position at the Royal Mint and went on 
to become a postmaster in Randers, Jutland.
€4,000-€6,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 218 ==========

Page 194 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
A Stunning Choice Speciedaler Pattern with Edge Lettering
A Type Unique in Private Hands
1158
DENMARK. Silver Speciedaler Pattern, 1822. Altona Mint. Frederik VI. NGC MS-63. KM-Unlisted; Dav-
Unlisted; Hede-26A, note p. 194; Sieg-Unlisted; Schou-3, Bruun-8056. Weight: 28.87 gms. Mintmaster: Johan 
Friedrich Freund (FF). Engraver: Georg Valentin Bauert. A stunning Pattern issue which is UNIQUE in 
private hands and in the uppermost echelon of desirability, this Speciedaler boasts boldly struck details and 
a flan of exceptional quality. The surfaces show only the slightest forms of handing, with a steely brilliance 
shining throughout. Swatches of warm watercolor toning serve to soften the surfaces, and enliven the appeal. 
Technically pleasing, and historically interesting, this Pattern is certainly long with its list of attributes. 
This Pattern reads KONGENS HELBRED FOLKETS GLÆDE (“The health of the king is the joy of the people”) 
with reeding spacing the words on the edge, as distinguished from the standard circulation issues with regular 
edge reeding. Such issues with edge lettering, of which 4 variations are known, are of the highest rarity, with only 
a few specimens divided between the National Museum of Denmark, the Hermitage Museum and the Bruun 
collection. 
€14,000-€18,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 3058 
in his collection.


========== PAGE 219 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 195
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Exciting and Entrancing Near-Gem with Exceptional Preservation
1159
DENMARK. 2 Frederik d’Or, 1830. Altona Mint. Frederik VI. NGC MS-64+. Fr-286; KM-700; Hede-3; 
Sieg-35; Schou-1; Bruun-8080. Engraver: Johannes Conradsen. Mint Master: Johann Friedrich Freund (FF). 
Far surpassing the five other specimens of this date yet certified by NGC, this near-Gem glows with brilliant 
luster and is sharply struck in the intricate details. Light friction likely withholds this example from a higher 
grade, though this slight touch of handing does little to diminish the overall appeal. The technical surface 
preservation give this piece the appearance of a prooflike example, and given this stunning appeal, we expect 
no shortage of excited bids.
€5,000-€8,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 220 ==========

Page 196 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Phenomenally Preserved Plus Graded Gold Issue
1160
DENMARK. 2 Frederik d’Or, 1836. Altona Mint. Frederik VI. NGC MS-65+. Fr-288; KM-713.1; Hede-5A; 
Sieg-36.1; Schou-2; Bruun-8105. Weight: 13.27 gms. Mintmaster: Johan Friedrich Freund (FF). Engraver: 
Christen Christensen (Copenhagen). The only graded example of this particular CC/FF variant, and the sole 
finest graded example, by an appreciable amount, of any type of this date, reaching a lofty Gem level. The 
surfaces are softly glowing, with nice allure in the open fields, and crisp frosty devices. Signs of marking and 
handling are virtually nonexistent, leaving this as a elite example for the connoisseur of the finest Danish gold. 
This Double Frederik d’Or marks the reintroduction of the wild man shield holders, which until then had only 
appeared on two Danish coin types; the broad Talers of Christian IV and a Taler emission in 1747 commemorating 
the anointment of king Frederik V (and strictly speaking also the Oldenburg 1690 Zweidrittel, but that was 
intended for use in Oldenburg alone).
€7,000-€10,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 221 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 197
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Impressive Specimen Striking Speciedaler of Frederik VI
1161
DENMARK. Speciedaler, 1837. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik VI. NGC SPECIMEN-66.  KM-695.4; Dav-
73; Hede-26C; Sieg-30.3; Schou-3; Bruun-8110. Weight: 28.79 gms. Mintmaster: Georg Wilhelm Svendsen 
(WS). Engraver: Johannes Conradsen (IC). An always popular issue is here taken to another level with this 
example, presenting a special specimen strike which gives this Speciedaler an elite eye appeal. The surfaces 
are soft and watery, with a sharpness to the details that far exceeds business strikes. Crested by handsome 
tones of electric blue and mauve-yellow, this specimen offers a colorful mélange that is quite pleasant. The 
rims are nicely defined from the fields, and this example is the first specimen or proof of this date we can 
locate, highlighting its UTMOST RARITY.
€4,000-€6,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 222 ==========

Page 198 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Christian VIII, born in 1786 in Copenhagen, ascended to the throne following the 
death of his half-cousin King Frederik VI, who did not have any sons to inherit the 
crown. Well educated in his youth, he was an intelligent man who harbored a love 
of science and art. As the presumptive heir, he was named Stattholder of Norway 
and after the Treaty of Kiel saw the Danish cession of Norway to Sweden, he sup -
ported Norwegian independence and was elected King of Norway in 1814. This 
was to be short lived, as Sweden invaded in a successful attempt to force a Swedish-
Norwegian alliance as delineated in the Treaty of Kiel. Christian abdicated his posi-
tion as king and returned to Denmark; King Charles XIII of Sweden became King 
Charles II of Norway.
After Christian VIII ascended to the Danish throne in 1839, he carried out sig-
nificant administrative reforms, though the liberal romantic liberalism he had em-
braced in his youth had diminished, and he firmly resisted the idea of a constitu -
tional regime. 
Internationally, Christian VIII faced challenges in the later part of his reign, par -
ticularly regarding the Schleswig-Holstein Question, a territorial dispute between 
Denmark and the German Confederation. His attempts to resolve this issue and 
maintain Danish control over the duchies were unsuccessful, ultimately leading to the First Schleswig War after his 
death.
Christian VIII died in 1848 at the age of 61, well aware that the days of absolute monarchy were numbered.
National coinage was, for the most part, stable during Christian VIII’s reign. Speciedalers, Rigsbankdalers, and 
smaller denominations of Rigsbank Skillings were minted, as well as a small amount of gold pieces, namely 1 and 
2 Christians d’Or. Bank notes were once again declared to be convertible into coin, and older courant issues were 
withdrawn and melted.
(REIGNED 1839-1848)
Christian VIII by
Wilhelm Marstrand  (1810–1873)
CHRISTIAN VIII
Christian VIII and Queen Caroline Amalie in coronation robes.

========== PAGE 223 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 199
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Exceptionally Bold Christian VIII Speciedaler Striking in Proof Quality
1162
DENMARK. Speciedaler, 1840. Copenhagen Mint; mm: Heart. Christian VIII. NGC PROOF-65.  KM-
720.1; Dav-74; Hede-3A; Sieg-13.1; Schou-1, Bruun-8131. Weight: 28.79 gms. Mintmaster: Georg Vilhelm 
Svendsen. Engraver: Harald Conradsen. Meticulously produced, this superb Speciedaler boasts pinpoint 
delineation of the all the intricate details in the central designs with especially sharp rims that rise boldly at 
the edges. Impeccably refined in the fields as well, with full reflectivity accompanied by an adornment of soft 
gold, blue, and mauve tones. Absolutely RARE in this quality and by far the finest example of the two proofs 
that NGC has certified.
€3,000-€5,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 224 ==========

Page 200 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Essentially Flawless Christian d’Or Graded MS-68
1163
DENMARK. 2 Christian d’Or, 1841. Copenhagen Mint; mm: Heart. Christian VIII. NGC MS-68.  Fr-
289; KM-722.1; Hede-1A; Sieg-16.1; Schou-1; Bruun-8136. Weight: 13.27 gms. Mintmaster: Georg Wilhelm 
Svendsen. Engraver: Christen Christensen (CC). While often encountered in comparatively inferior grades, 
this exquisite representative has no peer, being the sole finest graded example yet holdered by NGC, clearing 
the next best example by a full two points. Being so close to flawless, this coin has nothing in the way of stray 
marks, and the surfaces are gently reflective and brilliant. Evidence of multiple strikes is seen, particularly 
in the legends, suggesting this example may have been a special strike and going beyond a normal business 
strike.
€8,000-€12,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 225 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com Page 201
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Stunning Superb-Gem Christian d’Or with Superior Eye Appeal
1164
DENMARK. Christian d’Or, 1843. Altona Mint. Christian VIII. NGC MS-67★. Fr-290; KM-730; Hede-
2; Sieg-15; Schou-1; Bruun-8162. Weight: 6.63 gms. Mintmaster: Johan Friedrich Freund (FF). Engravers: 
Frederik Christopher Krohn (FK) / Hans Frederik Alsing. Immediately captivating, this Christian d’Or gives 
off the appearance of a proof or specimen striking. The surfaces are essentially unmarked, and the details are 
beautifully applied. Deep frost is seen on the obverse, with nice contrast. The finest specimen yet certified 
by NGC, yet even this undersells the overall beauty of the example, being quite superior and possessing an 
undeniable magnetism.
€8,000-€12,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 226 ==========

Page 202 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Frederik VII ruled Denmark from 1848 until his death in 1863. The son of Chris -
tian VIII and his first wife Duchess Charlotte Frederica of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, 
Frederik was the last monarch from the ancient House of Oldenburg and the last 
king of Denmark to rule as an absolute monarch. He was crowned in January of 
1848 and by June 5th of that same year had signed the new constitution into be -
ing, which significantly expanded civil rights, established a bicameral parliament, 
and laid the groundwork for a more representative government. June 5 is still cel-
ebrated as Constitution Day in Denmark.
Immediate upon his accession, Frederik VII had to contend with the ongoing 
Schleswig-Holstein Question, a complex territorial dispute between Denmark and 
the German Confederation. The First Schleswig War (also known as the Three 
Y ears War) began in March 1848; Frederik was able to emerge victorious from 
this conflict, becoming something of a national hero, though tensions over the is-
sue remained high. These tensions escalated and after Frederik’s death the Second 
Schleswig War commenced in 1864, resulting in significant territorial losses for 
Denmark.
Frederik VII died suddenly in November 1863 in the Duchy of Holstein, without 
a legitimate son to inherit the crown. Prince Christian of Glücksburg, the paternal descendant of Christian III, had 
been chosen as his presumptive in 1852 so upon the king’s passing, Christian took the throne as Christian IX.
Frederik VII’s accession was commemorated by the striking of a new Speciedaler bearing his portrait and motto: 
Folkets Kærlighed, min Styrke (the People’s Love, my Strength).
(REIGNED 1848-1863)
Frederik VII by
August Schiøtt (1823–1895)
FREDERIK VII
Frederik VII on horseback during a military parade.

========== PAGE 227 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 203
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Beautiful and Nearly Perfect Superb Gem Speciedaler
1165
DENMARK. Speciedaler, 1849. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik VII. NGC MS-67. KM-744.1; Dav-76; Hede-
4A; Sieg-6.1; Schou-1; Bruun-8197. Weight: 28.77 gms. Mintmaster: Georg Vilhelm Svendsen (VS). Engraver: 
Frederik Christopher Krohn (FK). A Superb-Gem and superbly pleasing, this Speciedaler immediately 
engages the eyes and is rather alluring. Gentle blue toning plays nicely with the satiny luster that dances when 
held in the light. The fields are generally free of mark or strafe, with the details being crisp and engrossing. 
The distinction in the devices and the overall surface quality give this piece the appearance of an example that 
was specially produced distinct from other Speciedalers of this date.
€4,000-€8,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 228 ==========

Page 204 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Incredible Nearly-Perfect MS-69 2 Frederik d’Or
1166
DENMARK. 2 Frederik d’Or, 1850. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik VII. NGC MS-69.  Fr-291; KM-750.1; 
Hede-1A; Sieg-16.1; Schou-1; Bruun-8200. Weight: 13.29 gms. Mintmaster: Georg Vilhelm Svendsen (VS). 
Engraver: Frederik Christopher Krohn (FK). Quite possibly the singularly most beautiful Danish gold of the 
modern era, as evidenced by its lofty grade, a mere one point short of perfection! This piece is such an outlier 
in terms of preservation, that it is the only MS-69 piece of Danish gold registered by NGC that is not from 
the 20th Century. Attempting to describe perfection is a task that has befuddled many, and with this piece 
being so close to that mark words can scarcely describe what the eyes see. Golden and lustrous, with details 
unimpaired by weakness and nice prooflike cameo contrast. An exemplar that will doubtlessly command all 
eyes when it is offered.
€15,000-€30,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 229 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 205
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Beautiful Premium Gem Issue with Glowing Color
1167
DENMARK. 2 Rigsdaler, 1855. Altona Mint. Frederik VII. NGC MS-66.  KM-761.1; Dav-77; Hede-6B; 
Sieg-14.2; Schou-3; Bruun-8234. Mintmaster: Johan Friedrich Freund (FF). Engraver: Frederik Christopher 
Krohn (FK). This appealing Superb-Gem glows with an electric complexion and eye appeal that tops the 
NGC population report as the sole finest graded specimen. Supple and reflective luster glows in appealing 
contrast to electrifying toning of bright blue, amber, and red. Even the lightest touches of friction are difficult 
to pick up, and the overall beauty of the surfaces is quite engaging. An example that will doubtlessly capture 
the attention and imagination of many, and lead to much excited bidding.
€3,000-€5,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 230 ==========

Page 206 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Christian IX, born in 1818, grew up in the Duchy of Schleswig as a prince of 
Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg, a junior branch of the House of 
Oldenburg. In 1852, Christian was chosen as heir-presumptive to the Danish 
throne in light of the expected extinction of the senior line of the House of Old-
enburg. Upon the death of King Frederik VII of Denmark in 1863, Christian 
(who was Frederik’s second cousin) acceded to the throne as the first Danish 
monarch of the House of Glücksburg.
Upon his accension, Christian was immediately plunged into the Second 
Schleswig War, a continuation of the earlier dispute between Denmark and the 
German Confederation over the duchies of Schleswig, Holstein, and Lauenburg. 
The war ended in 1864 with the Treaty of Vienna, whereby Denmark was forced 
to cede the disputed territories to Prussia and Austria.
In the years after the loss of the Schleswig, Christian’s popularity waned, un -
helped by his efforts to undermine democracy in Denmark by supporting vari -
ous conservative coalitions. In 1901, he reluctantly submitted to popular pressure 
and appointed the Cabinet of Deuntzer, the first liberal government that marked 
the beginning of parliamentary rule in Denmark.
Christian IX’s most enduring legacy lies in his family con-
nections. He married his children into various European 
royal houses, earning him the nickname “Father-in-law of 
Europe. ” His descendants would go on to rule in Greece, 
Britain, Russia, and other European countries, forging im-
portant dynastic ties across the continent.
Christian IX died peacefully of natural causes at the age of 
87 in January 1906.
During the early part of Christian’s reign, the national 
coinage remained largely unchanged from the form it took 
under his predecessor. However, the Coinage Act of 1873 
introduced the gold standard and placed Denmark on the 
completely new decimal-based system of Krones and Øres. 
This change was effected in direct response to the prevail-
ing economic concerns of the day—specifically, trade with 
Britain. Britain had repealed her Corn Laws in 1849, and 
Denmark was ready and willing to trade, and was flexible 
enough to continue that trade even when the steep com -
petition from the U.S. and Russia forced her to provide 
exports outside of the grain variety. As other countries 
were adopting the gold standard at this time, including the 
U.S. and Germany, the Scandinavian Monetary Union was 
formed by in 1873 Denmark and Sweden; Norway joined 
in 1875. All three countries adopted the gold standard 
and agreed to introduce a new common currency unit. It 
lasted until 1921 as difficulties from the first World War 
gradually undermined the foundations of the union.
(REIGNED 1863-1906)
Christian IX by
Henrik Olrik (1830–1890)
CHRISTIAN IX
Four generations of Danish kings.
Christian IX, his son Frederik (VIII), his grandson Christian (X), 
and his great grandson Frederik (IX).

========== PAGE 231 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 207
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Stunning Low Mintage Christian d’Or in Exemplary Quality
1168
DENMARK. Christian d’Or, 1869. Copenhagen Mint. Christian IX. NGC MS-67+.  Fr-294; KM-778; 
Hede-2; Sieg-6; Schou-2; Bruun-8291. Weight: 6.65 gms. Mintmaster: Diderik Christian Andreas Svendsen 
(CS). Engraver: Harald Conradsen (HC). Mintage: 539. An always in demand one-year type with a minuscule 
mintage of 539, the present example offers the chance to acquire a premium and unmatched example. The 
sole finest graded example of the date by a wide margin, this Christian d’Or displays bright luster and much 
evident die polish. The details are bold and well laid, and the rims are crisp and distinctive. A piece that has 
the appearance of a specially produced example, with an allure that should draw many in. 
Primarily used for international trade, the 1 and 2 Christian d’ or of Christian IX are the last Danish circulation 
coins to show the wild men shield holders - for now.
€8,000-€10,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 232 ==========

Page 208 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Stunning Superb-Gem Proof 2 Rigsdaler
1169
DENMARK. 2 Rigsdaler, 1872. Copenhagen Mint. Christian IX. NGC PROOF-67.  KM-772.2; Dav-
79; Hede-4B; Sieg-5.2; Schou-1; Bruun-8300. Weight: 28.91 gms. Mintmaster: Diderik Christian Andreas 
Svendsen (CS). Engraver: Harald Conradsen (HC). One of only three proof examples encapsulated by NGC, 
with this example being tied with one other specimen for the finest certified. Distinguished details are set 
against satiny lustrous fields, with the upset rims showing a particular elevation and squared off nature. 
Electric blue toning is seen across the surfaces, with no appreciable faults on the specially struck surfaces.
The beautiful portrait of the the king was made by sculptor Harald Conradsen, whose initials can be seen on the 
truncation, and clearly so on this remarkable piece.
€4,000-€6,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Christian IX – Rulers, Flags, and Coats of Arms series (N126-1)
issued by W . Duke, Sons & Co.

========== PAGE 233 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 209
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Stunning Nearly Perfect Proof 20 Kroner
1170
DENMARK. 20 Kroner, 1890. Copenhagen Mint. Christian IX. NGC PROOF-68 Cameo.  Fr-295; KM-
791.1; Hede-8A; Sieg-1.1; Schou-1; Bruun-8365. Weight: 8.96 gms. Mintmaster: Diderik Christian Andreas 
Svendsen (CS). Engraver: Harald Conradsen (HC). One of only two proof examples of this date holdered 
by NGC, with this example far outstripping the other Proof-64 Cameo example. About as close to the 
embodiment of numismatic perfection as one could hope for, the beauty is evident and overwhelming. The 
sharply applied details are nicely frosty, with sharp cameo distinction between the open elements and the 
devices. No evidence of handling or marking is seen, and on beauty, few coins are in the same class as this one.
An ever popular type with the wonderful portrait of the king by renowned sculptor Harald Conradsen (HC) and 
the embodiment of Denmark (Mor Danmark) on the reverse flanked by sheafs of grain and a bottlenose dolphin, 
representing agriculture and fishing, the two main traditional trades.
€7,000-€10,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 234 ==========

Page 210 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Frederik VIII, the eldest son of King Christian IX, was the Crown Prince and heir 
apparent to the Danish throne for more than 42 years, ascending to the throne at 
the age of 62. A popular figure plagued by ill health, his reign was short. He was a 
noted supporter of the parliamentary system, and served as Grand Master of the 
Danish Order of Freemasons from 1871 until his death. 
Two of his four sons would go on to be kings—his elder son would succeed him 
on the throne of Denmark as Christian X, and his younger son Carl would later 
become King Haakon VII of Norway in 1905. King Frederik VIII died while trav-
eling in May 1912. He lied in state in Christiansborg Palace in Copenhagen and 
is interred in Roskilde Cathedral, the traditional burial site for Danish monarchs.
Coinage under Frederik VIII was unremarkable in terms of differentiation from 
his predecessor; a 2 Krone was struck to commemorate his accession, echoing 
the 2 Rigsdaler that was struck for Christian IX’s accession before Denmark had 
moved to the Krone system. 20 and 10 Kroner pieces were also issued along with 
25, 10, 5, 2, and 1 Øre; all were designed by Gunnar Jensen.
(REIGNED 1906-1912)
Frederik VIII by
Peter Elfelt (1866–1931)
FREDERIK VIII
Frederik VIII and his wife Lovisa (Louise). Frederik VIII with his four siblings – 
Dagmar, Alexandra, Thyra and Vilhelm. 

========== PAGE 235 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 211
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Stunning and Nearly Perfect Proof with Bold Cameo Contrast
1171
DENMARK. 20 Kroner, 1910. Copenhagen Mint. Frederik VIII. NGC PROOF-68 Cameo. Fr-297; KM-
810; Hede-1; Sieg-2; Schou-1; Bruun-8436. Weight: 8.96 gms. Mintmaster: Vilhelm Burchard Poulsen (VBP). 
Engraver: Knud Gunnar Jensen (GJ). Falling a mere two points short of perfection, this tremendous proof 
offering delivers a visual intensity with which very few even ultra-modern issues can compete, much less a 
proof from the beginning of the twentieth century. The details are executed at a level of precision perhaps 
even beyond what one might expect from a proof strike, with these being topped with a gentle coat of frost. 
The rims are well delineated, and the soft reflectivity in the fields provides a nice contrast and confirms the 
Cameo designation. Approaching the top of both the Seldon scale, and the scale of desirability in this most 
exultant of grades.
€7,000-€10,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 236 ==========

Page 212 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Christian X was born in 1870, the eldest son of King Frederik VIII and Louise 
of Sweden. His reign, which oversaw a period of significant political, social, and 
historical turbulence, began during the time of rising tensions in Europe leading 
up to World War I. Christian resolved to keep Denmark neutral during the Great 
War and succeeded on that front, a move that was reinforced by his contemporary 
Scandinavian monarchs in Norway and Sweden.
Christian X was perhaps a less ardent supporter of the parliamentary system, and 
in 1920 he clashed with his cabinet, summarily dismissed them, and replaced them 
with his own conservative cabinet. This resulted in what would be known as the 
Easter Crisis of 1920, marked by widespread demonstrations and general discon-
tent. Realizing the gravity of the situation, negotiations were held, and Christian 
installed a compromise cabinet until elections could be held later that year. Seem-
ingly chastened after this incident, Christian spent the rest of his reign as a model 
of a constitutional monarch. 
In 1939, Nazi Germany invaded Poland, sparking the second world war across the 
globe, and in 1940 launched a surprise invasion of Denmark. Quickly overrun and recognizing the futility of fight-
ing, Denmark capitulated; thus began the occupation of Denmark which would last until Germany’s defeat. King 
Christian became a rallying symbol for Danish nationalism during the occupation, remaining in Copenhagen for its 
duration and, for the first two years of the occupation until his health began to deteriorate, riding his horse Jubilee 
through the streets of Copenhagen unaccompanied by even a groom.
Christian X died in Copenhagen in 1947 in Amalienborg Palace and is interred in Roskilde Cathedral. 
Coinage under Christian X featured many commemorative pieces struck for various occasions throughout his reign 
– his accession in 1912, his Silver Wedding in 1923, his 60th birthday in 1930, his Silver Jubilee in 1937, and his 75th 
birthday in 1945. Production of gold 10 Krones ceased in 1917, 20 Krones in 1931. After 1931, bank notes were no 
longer convertible into gold. 
As silver and bronze became too costly to be used for regular coinage, alloys like cupro-nickel and aluminum bronze 
were introduced in 1920 and 1924 respectively. Coins struck in pure iron (1918 to 1919) and pure aluminum (1941) 
were quickly abandoned, whereas zinc, which was introduced in 1941, continued to be used for the smallest denomi-
nations until 1972.
(REIGNED 1912-1947)
Christian X, ca. 1915.
CHRISTIAN X
Christian X riding a horse during the occupation of Denmark – 
Gyldenløvesgade Street in Copenhagen, ca. 1940s.

========== PAGE 237 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 213
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Exceptionally Alluring Superb-Gem Proof
1172
DENMARK. 20 Kroner, 1915. Copenhagen Mint. Christian X. NGC PROOF-67. Fr-299; KM-817; Hede-
1A; Sieg-3.1; Schou-1; Bruun-8460. Weight: 8.95 gms. Mintmaster: Vilhelm Burchard Poulsen (VBP). 
Engraver: Knud Gunnar Jensen (GJ). The only Proof example of this date certified by NGC, this 20 Kroner 
displays all the beauty one would expect from a proof striking with bold details and bright reflectivity. Nice 
distinction between devices and fields is seen, though not enough to rise to a cameo level. Only a singular 
break can be seen across the entire surfaces, highlighting tremendous conditional preservation. A piece 
whose beauty largely speaks for itself.
€6,000-€8,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 238 ==========

Page 214 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Norway has existed as a unified kingdom since probably the mid-9th century, 
though its beginnings are lost in the fog of pre-history. Very few reliable written 
sources have survived, if they ever existed at all.
Through the Viking Age and most of the medieval period, Norway was either 
independent or partially or even wholly ruled by Danish or Swedish kings, but 
in 1397 Norway, along with Denmark and Sweden, became part of the Kalmar 
union, united the rule of the Danish monarch. 
Though the terms of the Kalmar Union held that the realms were to remain inde-
pendent nations ruled by a single sovereign, Norway’s political autonomy dimin-
ished as it became increasingly integrated into the Danish realm. The Norwegian 
nobility and clergy retained some influence, but real power resided in Copenhagen. The Norwegian Riksråd (the 
Council of the Realm, or Privy Council) was abolished in 1536, and more and more of the political positions began 
to be held by Danes. In many ways, Norway ceased being a country and became a Danish province.
Prominent Norwegians, who in turn made a name for themselves in Denmark and in history, include intrepid mili-
tary leader Peter Tordenskjold (1690-1720) and famous playwright and scholar Ludvig Holberg (1684-1754).
While Sweden gained its independence under Gustav Vasa in 1523, Norway remained a part of the now double 
monarchy of Denmark/Norway until the early 19th century.
During the Napoleonic wars Denmark/Norway, despite their wish to remain neutral, had been forced to side with 
Napoleon after suffering several attacks by the British. As a result of Napoleon’s defeat, Denmark was forced to cede 
Norway to Sweden after the Congress of Vienna and the Treaty of Kiel in 1814. In an extraordinarily bold move, the 
Norwegians, inspired by the Enlightenment and, among others, the American and French Revolutions, crafted the 
most democratic and liberal constitution in Europe at the time and declared independence under the rule of Chris-
tian Frederik, prince of Denmark and steward of Norway. 
The constitution was signed at the Council of Eidsvoll on May 17, 1814, and Christian Frederik was elected king 
two days later. A short military campaign by the Swedes under the leadership of Crown Prince Karl Johan ended 
the brief stint of independence and Norway was once again under the rule of a foreign monarch, this time Sweden’s. 
They were, however, permitted to keep the new constitution along with independent institutions and only shared the 
monarch and foreign policy. May 17 is Norway’s national day and remains immensely important to Norwegians, and 
the tradition of creating and collecting ’17. Maj’ medals is as strong as ever.
The remainder of the 19th century was a time of peace. Commerce and national romanticism flourished, and by 
1905, during the rule of Oscar II (1872-1905), the time was right: a referendum on independence was held, and 
ballots were cast on August 13. With a staggering 99.95 percent in favor of independence, Norway became a fully 
independent country for the first time in more than 500 years. 
As their new king the Norwegians choose 33-year-old Prince Karl of Denmark, who took the name Haakon VII 
(1906-1957). He was son of then Danish Crown Prince Frederik (VIII, 1906-1912) and the younger brother of Chris-
tian X of Denmark (1912-1914). Through his paternal grandfather, Christian IX, he was also first cousin to King 
George of Greece (1863-1913), King George V of the United Kingdom (1910-1936) and Tsar Nicholas II or Russia 
(1894-1917). He was even, through his mother, the grandson of Karl X of Sweden and Norway (1859-1872). Suffice 
it to say, he was royally well connected.
Haakon VII saw Norway through two world wars and the Depression. From the start, he was a beloved and unifying 
monarch. 
When Germany invaded Norway in 1940, the heavy and unexpected resistance from the Norwegian forces made it 
possible for the king and the government to escape to England, bringing with them Norway’s gold reserves, some 53 
tons of it. Some of the gold was sold to finance the exiled government in London during the war. In 1988, a whopping 
100,484 Nordic gold coins, originating from the reserves, were bought by a Norwegian dealer from various banks in 
Canada and the USA and went onto the collectors’ market. 
The present king of Norway, Harald V , ascended the throne in 1991 and remains, much like his grandfather Haakon 
VII, a uniting and beloved national figurehead.
THE NORWEGIAN MONARCHY
The Scandinavian Peninsula.
THE COINAGE OF NORW AY

========== PAGE 239 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 215
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Nicely Toned Mark Struck at Gimsøy
One of Three Known in Private Hands
1173
NORW AY . Mark, 1545. Gimsøy Mint. Christian III. NGC EF Details—Cleaned. Hede-2; Sieg-3; NMD-
5; Schou-6; Bruun-9300. Weight: 9.55 gms. Mintmaster: Jørgen Kock, the younger. A few  minor flan flaws 
don’t detract from the fact that it is a lovely example, clearly struck and with almost no wear. Extremely rare, 
with only three are thought to exist in private collections, including another example in the L. E. Bruun 
collection, which is struck from different dies (Schou 7). The one not in the Bruun collection is holed, further 
underscoring the beauty of this example, both relative and real. Rich cabinet toning adorns this more than 
elusive type struck at Gimsøy in the former nunnery, near Skien in Telemark county. The mint was only in use 
from 1544 to 1546 when the buildings burned down and the silver mine in Gullnes dried out.
€30,000-€50,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: H. H. J. Lynge (Copenhagen - 1899) Lot # 299.
Ex: Johan Andreas Ferdinand Wolff (Copenhagen -  3/1882) Lot # 321.

========== PAGE 240 ==========

Page 216 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 241 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 217
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Presentable and Richly Toned Sølvgylden
1174
NORW AY . Sølvgylden (Gimsøydaler), 1546. Gimsøy Mint. Christian III. NGC AU Details—Cleaned.  
Hede-1; Sieg-4; NMD-2; Skaare-322; Schou-1; Bruun-9302. Weight: 29.38 gms. Mintmaster: Jørgen Kock, 
the younger. Extremely rare. The importance of the present example of this type, which has always been 
considered the piece de resistance of any collection of Norwegian coins, can hardly be overestimated. Of 
the 7-8 privately owned examples this is by far the best, with exceptional detail in the armor and lion’s mane 
superceding the faint hairlines that exist in the fields from a past cleaning. Apart from the almost unbelievable 
state of preservation, the artistical quality of the powerful portrait is also completely unsurpassed and is even 
superior to the contemporary Danish Talers. The unbroken pedigree from the late 18th century until today 
that includes a long line of prominent Norwegian numismatists is similarly unrivaled.
Although the dies were probably manufactured in Copenhagen, the so-called Gimsøy-Taler was minted in the 
former nunnery of Gimsøy near Skien in Telemark county. It was presumably struck from local silver mined at 
Gullnes, and is the only Taler-sized coin minted in Norway before 1628.
€200,000-€300,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Jans Peter Børhildus Grimsgaard Collection (Copenhagen - 12/1889) Lot # 414.
Ex: B. Biermann Collection (Oslo - 4/1853) Lot # 2.
Ex: August C. Mohr Collection (Copenhagen - 10/1847) Lot # 1018.
Ex: Christoph Daniel v. Kreber Collection (Copenhagen - 11/1841) Lot # 1118.
Ex: George F. Timm Collection (Copenhagen - 10/1834) Lot # 442.
Ex: Peter F. Suhm Collection (Copenhagen - 8/1800) Lot # 1322.

========== PAGE 242 ==========

Page 218 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Amber Toned and Nice Example of this Elusive Type
First Norwegian Speciedaler
1175
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1628. Christiania Mint. Christian IV . NGC AU Details—Reverse Scratched. 
KM-8; Dav-3529; Hede-1; Sieg-15.1; NMD-27B; Schou-15; Bruun-9308. Weight: 25.81 gms. Mintmaster: 
Anders Pedersen. The Mint in Christiania (present day Oslo) was opened in 1628 and the goldsmith, Anders 
Pedersen was appointed mintmaster on the 28th of April. This and all the following Specie-denominations 
struck for Christian IV carry the following bible quote (Proverbs 10:22): BENEDICTIO DOMINI DIVITES 
FACIT (“The blessing of the Lord gives wealth”), referring to the rich silver finds at Kongsberg. The design 
rather closely imitates the first Norwegian Taler from 1546 minted at Gimsøy, and this combination of a 
portrait of the king and the axe-bearing lion became a standard for all future Talers minted at Christiania.
This inaugural Speciedaler sports a lovely yet underplayed cabinet toning, and the scratches mentioned do 
not distract from its beauty.
€5,000-€7,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 243 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 219
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
1/2 Speciedaler with Engaging Appearance and Light Circulation
1176
NORW AY . 1/2 Speciedaler, 1629. Christiania Mint. Christian IV . NGC EF Details—Cleaned.  KM-11; 
Hede-10A; Sieg-13.1; NMD-52; Schou-19; Bruun-9321. Weight: 14.38 gms. Mintmaster: Anders Pedersen. 
Very rare with only a few recorded sales in the last decades. A compelling specimen, notwithstanding two 
small spots on the obverse, just in front of the king’s eyes, and deposits on the reverse by the last I in DOMINI.
€10,000-€15,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 244 ==========

Page 220 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Extremely Rare 2 Speciedaler with Nicely Preserved Brilliance
Only Two Examples Known to be Held Privately
1177
NORW AY . 2 Speciedaler, 1630. Christiania Mint. Christian IV . NGC AU-53. KM-13; Dav-3532; Hede-7A; 
Sieg-18.1; NMD-8; Schou-2; Bruun-9329. Weight: 57.97 gms. Mintmaster: Anders Pedersen. A supremely 
rare example, with only four specimens traced, two of which are known to be held privately, this marvelous 
and enticing 2 Speciedaler has much to commend it. The strike is clear and compelling, with only light touches 
of wear located on the highest elements of the design. Nice and rich color is seen throughout, providing good 
contrast with the more reserved gray brilliance. An example that is rich in both history and beauty.
This example was previously in the fabled collection of the Swiss numismatist, lieutenant colonel Karl Gustav 
Ritter von Schulthess-Rechberg (1792-1866), whose collection was dispersed at auction in Dresden in 1868.
€30,000-€40,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Karl Gustav Ritter von Schulthess-Rechberg Collection (Erbstein Auction, Dresden - 6/1868) Lot # 880.


========== PAGE 245 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 221
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Bright and Appealing Nearly-Choice Specimen 
with Rich Goldenrod Tone
1178
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1632. Christiania Mint. Christian IV . NGC MS-62+. KM-12; Dav-3534; Hede-5A; 
Sieg-16.1; NMD-32A; Schou-8; Bruun-9347. Weight: 28.98 gms. Mintmaster: Anders Pedersen. Shimmering 
hues of radiant blues and gold further enhance this already exceptional piece and make both obverse and 
reverse almost come alive.
The upright Norwegian lion can be traced back to 1247 but it wasn’t until 1283 that the lion was given the axe 
of king Olaf II to hold. Olaf was canonized in 1031 only a year after he was killed by a blow from a Dane-axe, 
which went on to become his signature symbol. The heraldic symbol of the axe-bearing lion still functions as 
the coat of arms of Norway.
€10,000-€12,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 246 ==========

Page 222 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Handsome Double Speciedaler with Retained Brilliance
1179
NORW AY . 2 Speciedaler, 1634. Christiania Mint. Christian IV . NGC VF-35. KM-13; Dav-3532; Hede-
7A; Sieg-18.1; NMD-12; Schou-3; Bruun-9356. Weight: 57.57 gms. Mintmaster: Anders Pedersen. Extremely 
rare; only 5 examples have been recorded with two in private collections. The striations, which are common 
on the thick and hefty multiples, are seen on the obverse but only hinted at on the reverse, which, if graded 
alone, would easily fetch a much higher grade.
€20,000-€25,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Peter v. Hemmert Collection (Copenhagen - 2/1807) Lot # 614.

========== PAGE 247 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 223
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Beautifully Toned 1/2 Speciedaler Piefort
1180
NORW AY . Speciedaler (1/2 Speciedaler, Piefort), 1634. Christiania Mint. Christian IV . NGC AU-50. 
Hede-11; Sieg-14; NMD-34B; Schou-6; Bruun-9359. Not listed in Davenport and KM. Weight: 28.91 gms. 
Mintmaster: Anders Pedersen. Patches of blue and purple tone on an almost golden background enliven this 
UNIQUE and imposing piece. A piéfort struck with the dies for a 1/2 Speciedaler (Hede 10) but with the 
full weight of a Speciedaler. A similar, also unique piece but with the date 1638 is in the National Museum of 
Denmark.
Whereas multiple Talers (2, 3 and 4 Talers) struck on heavy flans but with dies used for the regular Speciedalers 
were minted throughout a large part of the 17th century, piéfort issues struck with half Taler dies are almost non 
existent.
€40,000-€60,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 248 ==========

Page 224 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Beautifully Toned Overdate Half Speciedaler
1181
NORW AY . 1/2 Speciedaler, 1634/3. Christiania Mint. Christian IV . NGC EF-45. KM-11; Hede-10A; Sieg-
13.1; NMD-57; Schou-10; Bruun-9361. Weight: 14.33 gms. Mintmaster: Anders Pedersen. An EXCESSIVELY 
RARE date with distinct details for the the grade and beautiful cabinet toning throughout. 
The date has been altered in the die from 1633 with the original date remaining clearly visible.
€12,000-€15,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 901 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 249 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 225
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Lustrous and Brilliant 2 Speciedaler
1182
NORW AY . 2 Speciedaler, 1641. Christiania Mint. Christian IV . NGC MS-61. KM-13; Dav-3532; Hede-7A; 
Sieg-18.1; NMD-19; Schou-2; Bruun-9407. Weight: 58.05 gms. Mintmaster: Anders Pedersen. Of the only 
five recorded examples, three are privately owned, making this example EXTREMELY RARE. Wonderfully 
well-preserved with enticing toning, with all the appeal one would expect from a Mint State specimen.
€40,000-€50,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 926 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 250 ==========

Page 226 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 251 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 227
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Impressive Quadruple Speciedaler that is Unique in Private Hands
1183
NORW AY . 4 Speciedaler, 1644. Christiania Mint. Christian IV . NGC AU Details—Cleaned. KM-15; Dav-
3530; Hede-9B; Sieg-20.2; NMD-2; Schou-7; Bruun-9479. Weight:115.44 gms. Mintmaster: Peter Grüner 
(PG). UNIQUE in private hands, and the only example recorded besides one in Oslo and one in Bergen. The 
details are attractive and appealing, with only limited drawdown and actual circulation. The noted cleaning is 
evident in some brightness, but this flaw is relatively minor when considering the elusivity of the type. 
Peter Grüner was appointed mintmaster in Christiania on the 25th of February 1643 after having held this post 
at the Mint in Copenhagen from 1628 to 1636. 
€130,000-€160,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Christiane Lugge Collection (Copenhagen - 1818) Lot # 587.


========== PAGE 252 ==========

Page 228 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 253 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 229
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Bright and Wholesome Nearly-Choice Issue of Christian IV
1184
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1646. Christiania Mint. Christian IV . NGC MS-62. KM-12; Dav-3534; Hede-5B; 
Sieg-16.3; NMD-47; Schou-26; Bruun-9531. Weight: 28.94 gms. Mintmaster: Peter Grüner (PG). An absolute 
marvel of a coin in breathtaking condition, fully deserving of its lofty grade and easily the finest offered in 
public auction for decades.
€12,000-€16,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 254 ==========

Page 230 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Handsome and Moderately Circulated Example with Deep Cabinet Tone
1185
NORW AY . 1/2 Speciedaler, 1646. Christiania Mint. Christian IV . NGC EF-45. KM-11; Hede-10B; Sieg-
13.3; NMD-69; Schou-39; Bruun-9536. Weight: 14.37 gms. Mintmaster: Peter Grüner (PG). This RARE 
coin with its rich, dark, multicolor cabinet toning has the appearance of being in the higher end of the 
numeric grade. When coupled with the fact that very few have been offered in auction in the last decades, the 
desirability becomes resoundingly evident.
€15,000-€18,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 1066 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 255 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 231
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Beautifully Toned and Most Handsome Lightly Circulated 1/2 Speciedaler
1186
NORW AY . 1/2 Speciedaler, 1648. Christiania Mint. Christian IV . NGC AU-53. KM-11A; Hede-10B; Sieg-
13.4; NMD-71; Schou-20; Bruun-9576. Weight: 14.04 gms. Mintmaster: Peter Grüner (PG). This VERY 
RARE one-year type, struck on a larger planchet, is exquisitely toned. While it does come up for sale from 
time to time, this lovely high-grade specimen is sure to turn some heads.
€10,000-€12,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: August K. Krautwald Collection (Private Sale - 1916).

========== PAGE 256 ==========

Page 232 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 257 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 233
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
A Triple Speciedaler of Frederik III!
Among the Rarest Norwegian Types
1187
NORW AY . 3 Speciedaler, 1650. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU Details—Cleaned. KM-A39; Dav-
3586; Hede-10A; Sieg-23.1; NMD-17; Scou-3; Aagaard-24.1; Bruun-9613. Weight: 85.30 gms. Mintmaster: 
Peter Grüner (PG). Engraver: Hans zum Busch. UNIQUE variant of the 3 Speciedaler of 1650 of which three 
examples are known, the other two being in the National Museum of Denmark and the Hermitage in St. 
Petersburg, making this date UNIQUE in private hands, too. Of all known Triple Speciedalers struck between 
1649 and 1668, only three are in private collections (1652, 1666, 1668) not counting the ones in the L. E. 
Bruun collection. The striations in the planchet are due to its heftiness and is a common trait in very thick 
planchets. All details are well-defined on this remarkable coin and only a few spots of weaker strike shows. 
The coin simply oozes grandeur.
€200,000-€250,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Peter v. Hemmert Collection (Copenhagen - 2/1807) Lot # 765.


========== PAGE 258 ==========

Page 234 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Charming and Nearly Uncirculated Double Speciedaler
1188
NORW AY . 2 Speciedaler, 1650. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU-55. KM-38; Dav-3587; Hede-
9A; Sieg-22.1; NMD-35; Schou-7; Aagaard-20.3 (49-3/50-11); Bruun-9614. Weight: 56.66 gms. Mintmaster: 
Peter Grüner (PG). Engraver: Hans zum Busch. EXCESSIVELY RARE, this pleasing example is charmingly 
toned, with light goldenrod color throughout. Strike doubling is seen, particularly at the legends, but fails to 
obscure the designs. A pleasingly detailed example of this hefty and impressive type.
€70,000-€90,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 1187 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 259 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 235
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Presentable and Lightly Toned Speciedaler
1189
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1650. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU Details—Cleaned. KM-37; Dav-
3588; Hede-8B; Sieg-21.2; NMD-70; Schou-19; Aagaard-21.4 (49-3/50-2); Bruun-9616. Weight: 28.44 gms. 
Mintmaster: Peter Grüner (PG). Engraver: Hans zum Busch. Despite the evidence of past cleaning, this coin 
is surely quite presentable: There is so much power in the contrast between the slightly uneven rim and the 
well-defined surfaces.
€7,000-€9,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 1190 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 260 ==========

Page 236 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Impressively Hefty and Most Appealing Two Speciedaler
1190
NORW AY . 2 Speciedaler, 1651. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU-53. KM-44; Dav-3589; Hede-
9B; Sieg-22.2; NMD-36; Schou-3; Aagaard-32.1 (51-1/51-3); Bruun-9630. Weight: 57.21 gms. Mintmaster: 
Frederik Grüner (FG). Engraver: Hans zum Busch. UNIQUE for the variety in private hands. Three further, 
but slightly different variants are in the National Museum of Denmark, the Münzkabinett, Berlin and the 
Hermitage, St. Petersburg. With only light wear to the uppermost features on the obverse and a couple of 
superficial contact marks in the fields, this lovely coin has a pleasant toning which brings out the many 
magnificent details.
€100,000-€120,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 261 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 237
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Exceedingly Rare and Problem Free 1/2 Speciedaler
Presumed to be Unique
1191
NORW AY . 1/2 Speciedaler, 1651. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU-55. KM-36; Hede-11B; Sieg-
16.2; NMD-118; Schou-10; Aagaard-27.1; Bruun-9632. Weight: 14.15 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik Grüner 
(FG). Engraver: Hans zum Busch. Showing very light traces of handling and plenty of luster, especially on the 
reverse, this EXCESSIVELY RARE, lovely Half Speciedaler is presumably UNIQUE in private hands. Faint 
toning adds to its beauty.
€40,000-€50,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 262 ==========

Page 238 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Beautiful Double Speciedaler with Rich Color
1192
NORW AY . 2 Speciedaler, 1652. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU-58. KM-44; Dav-3589; Hede-
9B; Sieg-22.2; NMD-37;Schou-5; Aagaard-37.1 (51-5/52-2); Bruun-9645. Weight: 57.47 gms. Mintmaster: 
Frederik Grüner (FG). Engraver: Hans zum Busch. Only two or three examples are recorded in private hands 
from among just a handful of surviving examples. A wonderfully toned survivor with spectacular detailing 
existing in both the hair of the king and on the lion.
€70,000-€90,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 263 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 239
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Very Desirable and Rare 1652 Speciedaler
1193
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1652. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU Details—Obverse Tooled. KM-cf. 
A46; Dav-cf. 3592; Hede-14; Sieg-24; NMD-73; Schou-8; Aagaard-41.1 (52-3/52-3); Bruun-9648. Weight: 
28.69 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik Grüner (FG). EXTREMELY RARE with only a very few in private hands. 
Light tooling is visible in the fields on both the obverse and reverse, but there is very little wear, which 
accounts for the grade. 
This splendid rarity was acquired by Aug. Krautwald for Bruun in the 1914 auction of tanner Lauritz Christian 
Petersen (1859-1927). Petersen, who contributed to his own catalog with many interesting numismatic 
observations himself, was first and foremost a collector of medieval coins of which Bruun bought many in the 
following sale of 1917.
€15,000-€20,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Lauritz C. Petersen Collection (Sagførernes Auktioner, Copenhagen - 5/1914) Lot # 843.

========== PAGE 264 ==========

Page 240 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 265 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 241
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Appealing Double Speciedaler with Only Limited Handling
1194
NORW AY . 2 Speciedaler, 1654. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU-58. KM-38A; Dav-3594; Hede-
18; Sieg-27; NMD-40; Schou-4; Aagaard-44.4; Bruun-9679. Weight: 57.38 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik Grüner 
(FG). Obverse engraved by Jeremias Hercules. Of about eight examples known, only two or three are in 
private hands. This wonderful specimen shows plenty of luster and only very light handling with no visible 
wear on the high points and the delicate features such as the king’s hair.
€80,000-€100,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Carl F. Schubart Collection (Copenhagen - 10/1831) Lot # 1063.

========== PAGE 266 ==========

Page 242 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 267 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 243
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Beautifully Toned Speciedaler with 
Light Amber Essence and Handsome Luster
1195
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1654. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-62.  KM-48; Dav-3595; Hede-
17; Sieg-26; NMD-76; Schou-8; Aagaard-45.4 (54-2/54-2); Bruun-9683. Weight: 28.77 gms. Mintmaster: 
Frederik Grüner (FG). Obverse engraved by Jeremias Hercules. Two minute splits at the utmost rim and a 
light double-striking doesn’t deter from the fact that this is an absolutely stunning Mint State example with 
lovely toning.
€10,000-€12,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 268 ==========

Page 244 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 269 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 245
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Impressive and Extremely Hefty 4 Speciedaler
The Only Known Example in Private Hands
1196
NORW AY . 4 Speciedaler, 1656. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU-55. KM-A50; Dav-A3596; Hede-
24; Sieg-32; NMD-12; Schou-2; Aagaard-47.1; Bruun-9711. Weight: 115.10 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik 
Grüner (FG). A truly monumental numismatic treasure, highly detailed, with plenty of luster. Along the rims 
is lovely toning alive with patches of blue and gold. The small imperfections in the obverse fields are due to 
the heftiness of the planchet, as can be seen in the additional photo of the edge. Of the six known Quadruple 
Speciedalers from Frederik III, this is the only one in private hands. Of the remaining five examples, four 
(1656, 1657, 1658, 1661) are in the National Museum of Denmark, one (1657) is in the Hermitage, St. 
Petersburg. To be able to enter this piece in one’s collection should therefore be nothing less than a dream 
come through for anyone with the slightest interest in Norwegian numismatics or European multiple Talers.
While the engraver remains unknown, he is presumed to be a Norwegian.
This outstanding coin was bought by count Preben Bille-Brahe (1773-1857) in the 1841 estate auction of Christoph 
Daniel von Kreber’s eminent collection of Danish and Norwegian coins and medals. Von Kreber (1755-1840) 
was a Major General in the Danish army and chamberlain at the court. Quite unusually, v. Kreber didn’t begin 
collecting until he had reached the age of 73, but in only 11 years he managed to create an astounding collection 
of Danish and Norwegian coins of which the present is an absolute highlight.
€300,000-€400,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Christoph Daniel v. Kreber (Copenhagen - 7/1841) Lot # 1899.


========== PAGE 270 ==========

Page 246 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 271 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 247
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Wholly Attractive Double Speciedaler
1197
NORW AY . 2 Speciedaler, 1656. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-62. KM-41; Dav-3596; Hede-
22; Sieg-30; NMD-43; Schou-7; Aagaard-49.3 (56-3/56-10); Bruun-9712. Weight: 57.86 gms. Mintmaster: 
Frederik Grüner (FG). The finest of only two privately owned examples. A further three examples are known 
from public collections in Denmark and Norway. A lovely rim toning on the obverse elevates the appearance 
with a few light contact marks on the king’s chin. The reverse is awash in a wonderful silvery brilliance.
Guildal acquired this superlative example from Major General Carl Thorvald Jørgensen (1819-1902), who in 
1888 published a still useful reference catalog of Danish coins from 1448-1888.
€100,000-€120,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 1312 
in his collection.
Ex: Carl T. Jørgensen Collection (Private Sale - 1901).
Carl Thorvald Jørgensen,  
Danish general.

========== PAGE 272 ==========

Page 248 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 273 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 249
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Extremely Rare and Well Preserved 1/2 Speciedaler
1198
NORW AY . 1/2 Speciedaler, 1656. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU-58. KM-47; Hede-20A; Sieg-17; 
NMD-124; Schou-16: Aagaard-46.5; Bruun-9717. Weight: 14.26 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik Grüner (FG). 
Obverse engraved by Jeremias Hercules. An impeccable example of one of Frederik III’s always highly sought 
after and VERY RARE 1/2 Speciedalers adorned by speckles of blue and orange toning.
€100,000-€120,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: H. H. J. Lynge Collection (Copenhagen - 1899) Lot # 1158.
Ex: Alfred Benzon Collection (Copenhagen - 5/1887) Lot # 1080.

========== PAGE 274 ==========

Page 250 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 275 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 251
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Alluring and Nicely Detailed Triple Speciedaler
The Only Example Known
1199
NORW AY . 3 Speciedaler, 1657. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU Details—Edge Filing. KM-39a; 
Dav-3599; Hede-28; Sieg-35; NMD-24; Schou-8; Aagaard-53.1; Bruun-9733. Weight: 86.28 gms. Mintmaster: 
Frederik Grüner (FG). Engraver: Matthias Först (?). Apart from traces of filing on some parts of the edge, an 
absolutely splendid and spectacularly detailed example of this massive piece. Of the approximately 40 known 
3 Speciedalers from Frederik III, 10 of them reside in the Bruun Collection, all different. This is the only 
known of any variation dated 1657, thus marking a tremendously rare opportunity to acquire an important 
numismatic object which is genuinely UNIQUE with not even a single example held in public collections 
worldwide.
€200,000-€250,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).


========== PAGE 276 ==========

Page 252 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
One of the Finest Known 1658 Speciedalers
1200
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1658. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU-58. KM-A43; Dav-3603; Hede-
30A; Sieg-37.1; NMD-84; Schou-19; Aagaard-57.1: Bruun-9770. Weight: 28.82 gms.  Mintmaster: Frederik 
Grüner. Engraved by Matthias Först (?) and Johan Blum. VERY RARE and with brilliance throughout and 
only light traces of handling on the obverse, this coin is among the best of the examples in private hands.
€12,000-€14,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 1341 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 277 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 253
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Well Presented Example of the Elusive 1659-FG Speciedaler
1201
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1659. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC Unc Details—Cleaned.  KM-51; 
Dav-3604; Hede-33B; Sieg-40.2; NMD-89B; Schou-24; Aagaard-67.1; Bruun-9802. Weight: 28.78 gms.  
Mintmaster: Frederik Grüner (FG). Obverse engraved by Johan Blum. An elusive type in any condition, this 
example is a yet presentable piece with nice details unafflicted by circulation. The “cleaned” designation is the 
result of some cleaning lines in the fields, though toning has started to retake the surfaces. A wholesome piece 
that provides generally good appeal.
€10,000-€12,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 278 ==========

Page 254 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 279 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 255
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Remarkable 1660-FG Ducat of Norway
The First Norwegian Ducat Issue Ever Struck
1202
NORW AY . Ducat, 1660-FG. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU Details—Cleaned.  Fr-1; KM-61; 
Hede-1; Sieg-68; NMD-6; Schou-4; Aagaard-72.1; Bruun-9823. Weight: 3.48 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik 
Grüner (FG); Engraver: Johan Blum. The first Norwegian Ducat ever, with only three examples of the type 
recorded in gold and two in silver, leaving this as an EXTREMELY RARE type that stands near the pinnacle 
of Norwegian numismatics. The three-quarters facing bust is phenomenal, with a level of precision to the 
details that is beyond engaging, and very few other types bear as attractive a portrait. The surfaces are bright 
and brilliant, giving a nice vibrant hue, and traces of actual wear are hard to discern. The noted cleaning refers 
to some hairlines in the reverse field, which do little to dampen the general appeal of the piece. A Ducat that 
is certain to generate exceptional demand, as chances to own another one are beyond limited.
€200,000-€300,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 1397 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 280 ==========

Page 256 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 281 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 257
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Lovely 2 Speciedaler from Norway
Featuring Handsome Tone and Nice Luster
1203
NORW AY . 2 Speciedaler, 1660. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-61. KM-A52; Dav-3606; Hede-
34; Sieg-41; NMD-50; Schou-9; Aagaard-69.3; Bruun-9824. Weight: 57.55 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik Grüner 
(FG). Obverse engraved by Johan Blum. EXCEPTIONALLY RARE as only about 10 examples are believed 
to have survived of all the different die-variations put together. Of these, four are presumed to be privately 
owned. This example certainly does not lack for beauty in addition to its rarity, being brightly lustrous and 
handsomely toned. Rich color is unfurled across the surfaces, and limited actual handling is seen, leaving a 
wholly original and attractive appeal to the piece. A small planchet flaw can be spotted just over the crown on 
the obverse and a touch of double striking is visible on the reverse, most noticeably by the date.
This Double Speciedaler is a shining example of a 17th century engraver combining the necessity of coinage with 
artistry and beauty.
€90,000-€110,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 282 ==========

Page 258 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Beautifully Toned and Stunning Mint State Speciedaler
1204
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1660. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-60.  KM-54; Dav-3607; Hede-
33B; Sieg-40.2; NMD-90; Schou-19; Aagaard-70.6; Bruun-9831. Weight: 28.72 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik 
Grüner (FG). Obverse engraved by Johan Blum. An attractive Speciedaler, this example displays nice retained 
brilliance and charming tone at the peripheries and within the devices enlivening the surfaces. Some handling 
in the fields accounts for the grade assigned, though this well struck and uncirculated example certainly 
presents exquisitely. A piece that certainly is lovely to look at, and one that belongs in any premium collection 
of Talers or Crowns.
€8,000-€10,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 283 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 259
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Appealing About Uncirculated 1/2 Speciedaler with Bright Luster
1205
NORW AY . 1/2 Speciedaler, 1660. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU-55. KM-53; Hede-37; Sieg-18; 
NMD-128; Schou-21; Aagaard-71.2; Bruun-9832. Weight: 14.24 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik Grüner (FG). 
Obverse engraved by Johan Blum. EXTREMELY RARE with probably no more than three or four in private 
collections, this Half Speciedaler displays a wholesome steely brilliance with some deepening of the tone 
around the legends. The surface display on light handling and the wear is limited to the high elements of the 
design. A splendid example that is certainly worthy of all the praise that can be heaped upon it.
€50,000-€70,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Christian Jürgensen Thomsen (Copenhage - 5/1869) Lot # 881.

========== PAGE 284 ==========

Page 260 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Evenly Handled and Very Rare 1/8 Speciedaler
One of Only Two Known in Private Hands
1206
NORW AY . 1/8 Speciedaler, 1660. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC EF-45. KM-60; Hede-cf. 1; Sieg-
8; NMD-144; Schou-22; Aagaard-72.1; Skaare-552, Bruun-9833. Weight: 3.53 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik 
Grüner (FG). Engraver: Johan Blum. One of only two known in private hands, this example certainly does 
not lack for rarity. The weight is consistent with a 1/8 Speciedaler, and was likely produced as such instead of 
being an off-metal striking of a Ducat. The surfaces are light gray with moderate and mostly even wear on the 
devices and traces of brilliance within the protected areas of the designs. A type that is not short on beauty, 
and one that should not be short on suitors.
€12,000-€18,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Alfred Benzon Collection (Copenhagen - 5/1887) Lot # 1172.

========== PAGE 285 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 261
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Rainbow Toned and Handsome 1/8 Speciedaler
1207
NORW AY . 1/8 Speciedaler (12 Skilling), 1661. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU-53. KM-62; Hede-
38B; Sieg-10.2; NMD-145A; Schou-46; Aagaard-74.1; Bruun-9872. Weight: 3.59 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik 
Grüner (FG). A SCARCE type that does not reach market often, this appealing fractional Speciedaler can 
count many merits. It is well detailed, with bright and glossy luster and charming deep toning throughout. 
Circulation is limited on this example that presents quite nicely for the technical grade.
€10,000-€12,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 286 ==========

Page 262 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Alluring Choice Mint State Speciedaler with Handsome Light Tone
1208
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1662. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-63. KM-A57; Dav-3614; Hede-
43; Sieg-48; NMD-98; Schou-30; Aagaard-84.1 (62-3/62-2); Bruun-9892. Weight: 28.73 gms. Mintmaster; 
Frederik Grüner (FG). Obverse engraved by Johan Blum. SCARCE and in all ways engaging, this lovely 
Choice Mint State example displays a rich allotment of details, and good clarity throughout. Light golden 
color highlights the surfaces, and there are no major marks to speak of. A flan crack is noted at approximately 
11 o’ clock, though this minor flaw does not affect the beauty and desirability of the piece to any substantial 
degree.
€12,000-€15,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: H. H. J. Lynge Collection (Copenhagen - 1899) Lot # 1277.

========== PAGE 287 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 263
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Beautifully Toned and Nearly Uncirculated Fractional Speciedaler
1209
NORW AY . 1/4 Speciedaler, 1663. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU-58. KM-69; Hede-46; Sieg-
15; NMD-140; Schou-23; Aagaard-85.1; Bruun-9917. Weight: 7.21 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik Grüner (FG). 
Obverse engraved by Johan Blum. The best of presumably only two privately owned examples of the five 
known, this fractional Speciedaler is rich with near-Mint beauty displaying a handsome appeal that is sure 
to capture attention. Double struck on both sides, its nice luster is preserved, which complements the sharp 
details well. A handsome allotment of color is seen, with a nice golden hue to the open fields, with some 
deeper color scattered throughout. Even with the very slight wear, this example presents as well as many Mint 
State coins.
€25,000-€30,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: H. H. J. Lynge Collection (Copenhagen - 1899) Lot # 1298.

========== PAGE 288 ==========

Page 264 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 289 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 265
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Handsome Mint State 2 Speciedaler with Light Orange Toning
1210
NORW AY . 2 Speciedaler, 1664. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-61. KM-57; Dav-3613; Hede-44; 
Sieg-49; NMD-58; Schou-17; Aagaard-92.3; Bruun-9935. Weight: 57.60 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik Grüner 
(FG). Obverse engraved by Johan Blum. EXCEPTIONALLY RARE, and likely the best of only a handful in 
private collections, this stunning and weighty issue delivers a soft brilliance that rises from the surfaces. The 
fine engraving is well-laid on the flan, with an edifying clarity and very little left wanting in terms of details. 
Only a few instances of contact are seen, with no major faults capturing the eye. A specimen that is rich with 
a gravitational magnetism, and as such all collectors such feel a tug of excitement when this tremendous 
example crosses the auction block.
€90,000-€110,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 290 ==========

Page 266 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Lustrous and Appealing Speciedaler with Nearly-Choice Preservation
Better of Two Privately Owned Examples of the Type
1211
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1664. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-62. KM-67; Dav-3617; Hede-49; 
Sieg-52; NMD-102; Schou-32; Aagaard-90.5; Bruun-9939. Weight: 28.78 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik Grüner 
(FG). Obverse engraved by Johan Blum. The better of what seems to be only two in private collections, this 
handsome and appealing Speciedaler delivers handsome brilliance, with nice details and limited instances 
of handling. Charming toning highlights the finer details, with some colorful punctuations at the rims. An 
altogether most pleasing and appealing crown-sized issue.
€30,000-€40,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 291 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 267
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Brilliant and Handsomely Toned Speciedaler with Bright Color
1212
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1664. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-62.  KM-70; Dav-3618; Hede-
52A; Sieg-55.1; NMD-104; Schou-34; Aagaard-94.1; Bruun-9940. Weight: 28.73 gms.  Mintmaster: Frederik 
Grüner (FG). Obverse engraved by Jeremias Hercules. EXTREMELY RARE and thus most desirable, this 
alluring Speciedaler delivers a rich ambiance of lustrous beauty, with shimmering details throughout and 
crisp well-formed details. Light tone is spread across the surface, with handsome rainbow color seen most 
vividly as the boundaries are approached. A touch of friction consistent for the grade is seen, though in the 
scope of the overall beauty of the piece, this amounts to a trifling nothingness. 
The two angels holding a crown above the king is a symbol of the sovereign monarch being chosen by the grace 
of God, and Jeremias Hercules’ obverse is generally considered a pinnacle in Norwegian numismatic Baroque 
portraiture. Hercules was appointed to a position at the Danish Mint in 1653, likely coming from Hamburg. 
He was dismissed from his position in 1655, though he returned in August 1664, and this Speciedaler likely 
represents one of the first projects he worked on upon his return. He continued as an engraver at the mint until 
his death in 1689, at which time Christian V allocated 20 Riksdalers for his funeral. 
€60,000-€80,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 1479 
in his collection.
Ex: Carl T. Jorgensen Collection (Private Sale - 1901).
Ex: Johan Andreas Ferdinand Wolff Collection (Copenhagen - 3/1882) Lot # 880.

========== PAGE 292 ==========

Page 268 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 293 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 269
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Beautiful Ducat with Sharp Strike and Handsome Brilliance
1213
NORW AY . Ducat, 1665. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-62. Fr-4; KM-77; Hede-2; Sieg-69; NMD-
7; Schou-9; Aagaard-2.1; Bruun-9955. Weight: 3.49 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik Grüner. Engraver: Jeremias 
Hercules. One of very few examples in private hands, this SUPREMELY RARE Ducat displays a handsome 
and sunny luster throughout. Light orange highlights pop and flash when the coin is rotated in the light, 
giving the surfaces a captivating appearance. Very limited in terms of handling, this Ducat provides a mostly 
wholesome appeal, leaving it as a premium example for the dedicated collector of elusive European gold.
€150,000-€200,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 1486 
in his collection.
Ex: Carl T. Jørgensen Collection (Private Sale - 1901).
Ex: Alfred Benzon Collection (Copenhagen - 5/1887) Lot # 1275.

========== PAGE 294 ==========

Page 270 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Extremely Rare and Nicely Toned Speciedaler with Bright Luster
1214
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1665. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-62.  KM-59; Dav-3619; Hede-
53C; Sieg-56.3; NMD-105; Schou-23; Aagaard-99.1; Bruun-9957. Weight: 28.73 gms.  Mintmaster: Frederik 
Grüner (FG). EXTREMELY RARE and quite laudatory in terms of condition, this beautiful Speciedaler is 
struck with exemplary precision in the fine details. Charming luster alights the surfaces, with handsome 
toning originating at the rims and works its way inward with diminishing power. A few instances of contact 
appear in the fields, though this does little to dampen the overall appeal of this specimen. A representative 
that is a cut above what is normally encountered on Speciedalers.
€60,000-€80,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: H. H. J. Lynge Collection (Copenhagen - 1899) Lot # 1329.
Ex: Johan Andreas Ferdinand Wolff Collection (Copenhagen - 3/1882) Lot # 881.

========== PAGE 295 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 271
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Extremely Rare 1/2 Speciedaler in Appealing Mint State Condition
1215
NORW AY . 1/2 Speciedaler, 1665. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-61. KM-72; Hede-60; Sieg-19; 
NMD-129; Schou-37; Aagaard-107.1; Bruun-9965. Weight: 14.39 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik Grüner (FG). 
EXTREMELY RARE with only about 10 examples known, this bright and wholesome Mint State example is 
commendably struck up, with crisp and well-articulated fine details. Touched with the occasional splash of 
color, the surfaces have a nice and wholly original appearance. Only hints of handling consistent for the grade 
are seen, yet the alluring nature remains unimpeded.
€60,000-€80,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Johan G. Guildal Collection (Private Sale - 1918); later published by the Danish Numismatic Society as item 1493 
in his collection.

========== PAGE 296 ==========

Page 272 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 297 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 273
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Mint State Ducat of Frederik III with Bright Luster
Among the Most Unobtainable of All World Gold Coins
1216
NORW AY . Ducat, 1669. Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC MS-62.  Fr-4; KM-88; Hede-6; Sieg-72; 
NMD-9; Schou-4; Aagaard-5.1; Bruun-10046. Weight: 3.48 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik Grüner (FG). Dated 
gold Ducats of Frederik III are amongst the most unobtainable of all world gold issues, with even the badly 
damaged examples being prized given the paucity of examples. Of the only four registered examples of this 
date, one is found in the National Museum of Denmark, one in the Münzkabinett in Vienna, and two reside 
in private collections, of which this example is the best. Given the extreme rarity of a Frederik III Ducat, any 
example would serve the needs of most collectors, though this specimen boasts tremendous eye appeal to 
boot. The rich luster shines, with a bright mirrored reflectivity presented. The details are engaging and well-
placed, with handling remaining quite limited. The last public record of any Frederik III dated Ducat trading 
was a creased and mounted 1665, which realized a hammer price of approximately 150,000 Euros in 2018. 
Given the superiority of this example, we expect all collectors seeking a true treasure to place bids, given that 
the chances of finding a comparable example are close to zero.
€140,000-€180,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 298 ==========

Page 274 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 299 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 275
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
A Fabulous and Enormously Rare 2 Speciedaler
Celebrating Frederik as Sovereign of Norway
One of the Absolute Highlights of All Norwegian Coinage
Unique in Private Hands
1217
NORW AY . 2 Speciedaler, ND (1661). Christiania Mint. Frederik III. NGC AU-58.  KM-65; Dav-3608; 
Hede-40; Sieg-45; NMD-52; Schou-12; Aagaard-A1; Rønning-40; Skaare-536; Bruun-10082. Weight: 57.60 
gms. Mintmaster: Frederik Grüner. Obverse engraved by Johan Blum. Arguably the most famous, beautiful, 
and coveted 17th century Norwegian coin is represented here by an absolutely mesmerizing example with 
wonderful details and lovely iridescent toning. The bold strike has only been lightly touched by circulation, 
and these details are nicely complimented by handsome brilliance. This specimen is the only privately owned 
example of the three known, with the other two resting in the National Museum of Denmark and the Gotha 
Coin Cabinet in Friedenstein. Given the ENORMOUS RARITY, this lot represents a singular opportunity 
to acquire a piece that is at the pinnacle of Norwegian numismatics, and such a chance seldom arises in 
numismatics. A piece that should engender the most fierce bidding, as the chance to ever acquire this piece 
again will likely evaporate away once the hammer falls on this lot. 
This outstanding type was struck to commemorate the celebration of king Frederik as a sovereign monarch of 
Norway. The ceremony took place at Akershus on August 15th 1661 in the presence of crown prince Christian 
V . While the obverse had previously been used for the regular Speciedalers from 1659 and 1660 (Aagaard die 
59-4), the reverse is in every way unique in Scandinavian monetary history. Below the text “ Aggers Haus” is a 
beautifully composed and balanced rendering of Akershus Castle on top of a rock overlooking the sea. Akershus, 
which can still be visited in the Norwegian capital Oslo, was constructed around 1300 to protect and provide a 
royal residence for the city. Many late medieval monarchs resided there, including Margaret (Margrethe) I (1375-
1412), who was the architect of the Kalmar Treaty which united the Scandinavian countries Denmark, Norway 
Continued on Page 276

========== PAGE 300 ==========

Page 276 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
(with Iceland) and Sweden (with Finland) under a Danish monarch. Christian IV , always very personally 
involved in the architectural design of official buildings, first transformed Akershus from a medieval castle into a 
regular fortress in 1592 and then from 1637 onwards into a full-blown renaissance castle complete with Italian 
inspired bastions, also visible on the design of the coin. A Portugaloser (Schou-2) struck from the same reverse die 
but with a different obverse die cut a year earlier (Aagaard 60-1) is known in three examples: one in the Royal 
Coin Cabinet at the National Museum of Denmark, one in the Coin Cabinet (Universitetets Myntkabinett) in 
Oslo and Bruun-10080 from the C. F. Schubart collection.
€500,000-€750,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Akershus Fortress constructed around 1300 can still 
be visited today in the Norwegian capital city of Oslo.

========== PAGE 301 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 277
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Appealing 2 Speciedaler with Handsome Preserved Brilliance
1218
NORW AY . 2 Speciedalers, 1670. Christiania Mint. Christian V . NGC AU-53. KM-100; Dav-3649; Hede-
26A; Sieg-50.1; NMD-41; Schou-4; Bruun-10085. Weight: 57.55 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik Grüner (FG). 
EXCEEDINGLY RARE with only about four known examples, this exemplar certainly is amongst the more 
elusive of Norwegian types. Presenting a wholesome appeal with nice details and well-presented brilliance 
across the surfaces. Limited deep toning plays across the peripheries, with occasional splashes of color seen 
elsewhere on the design. Circulation is limited, seen only on the high elements such as the King’s cheek and 
curls of his hair. 
Interestingly, this type, struck around the time of the coronation, is the last time a Norwegian coin presents 
the king wearing a crown, as it had become a fashion for the European monarchs to wear a laurel wreath like 
the Roman emperors. A hefty treasure, and one for which corollary examples would be tough to locate.
€70,000-€90,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.


========== PAGE 302 ==========

Page 278 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Glossy Mint State Speciedaler with Alluring Charm
1219
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1670. Christiania Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-62. KM-97; Dav-3650; Hede-
25A; Sieg-49.1; NMD-54; Schou-9; Bruun-10086. Weight: 28.76 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik Grüner (FG). 
An elegantly designed issue that highlights exceptional engraving and was impressively struck. The surfaces 
glow with a gentle glossy luster, and touches of charming toning hug the rims and provide a warm colorful 
contrast. Undeniably RARE in such a charming preservation.
€40,000-€60,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 303 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 279
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Bright and Charming Nearly Mint State 1/2 Speciedaler
1220
NORW AY . 1/2 Speciedaler, 1671. Christiania Mint. Christian V . NGC AU-58. KM-107; Hede-33; Sieg-47; 
NMD-69A; Schou-13; Bruun-10113. Weight: 14.27 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik Grüner (FG). An EXTREMELY 
RARE 1/2 Speciedaler, this appealing and nearly uncirculated example displays fully impressed details, with 
only the lightest touches of circulation seen on the high elements of the design. Rich and vibrant rainbow 
color dapples the flan, with a most handsome variegated hue. In recent years, only a few other examples of 
this date and denomination have traded, leaving it as a most desirable and attractive representative for those 
seeking one for their holdings.
€30,000-€40,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 304 ==========

Page 280 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 305 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 281
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Nearly Uncirculated 2 Ducats Featuring a Trumpeting Elephant
1221
NORW AY . 2 Ducats, 1673. Christiania Mint. Christian V . NGC AU-58. Fr-11B; KM-121; Hede-11; Sieg-
70; NMD-12; Schou-5; Bruun-10149. Weight: 6.91 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik Grüner. Among the RAREST 
Norwegian coins, this Double Ducat offers an extremely popular type in a beautiful state of preservation. 
Soft sunny luster coats the surfaces, with generally appealing details unimpinged by excess wear. Circulation 
friction is limited to the highest design elements and is of minimal influence to the appearance. The fields are 
largely clean as well, presenting a mostly complete luster that is only seldom broken. A total of three examples 
of this type are known, with two being in private collections. As such, a most desirable opportunity to acquire 
a premium piece for any advanced collector.
Before entering the Benzon, the Bech and the Bruun collections this gorgeous piece was owned by an official at 
the National Bank of Denmark, Ove Theodor Thomsen (1803-1879).
€130,000-€160,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Frederik Christian Bech Collection (Sagførernes Auktioner, Copenhagen 12/1906) Lot # 669.
Ex: Alfred Benzon Collection (Copenhagen - 5/1887) Lot # 1574.
Ex: Ove Theodor Thomsen Collection (Copenhagen 10/1880) Lot # 3490.

========== PAGE 306 ==========

Page 282 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 307 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 283
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Charming and Lightly Circulated 2 Ducats
The Sole Privately Owned Example
1222
NORW AY . 2 Ducats, 1673. Christiania Mint. Christian V . NGC AU-55. Fr-12b; KM-122; Hede-13; Sieg-
72.1; NMD-13A; Schou-6; Bruun-10150. Weight: 6.94 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik Grüner. Of the only three 
recorded examples, this is the only one in private hands, highlighting the top-notch rarity of this type. Lightly 
handled, this appealing representative displays only cursory circulation. Evidence of prior surface contact is 
limited, and the vibrant goldenrod hue is nearly complete in its embrace of the surfaces. As one of the more 
consequential Norwegian offerings, a piece that will doubtlessly make a strong impression on any collector.
€150,000-€200,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 308 ==========

Page 284 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 309 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 285
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Multi-Hued and Handsome Mint State Speciedaler
1223
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1674. Christiania Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-60. KM-109; Dav-3656; Hede-
29B; Sieg-53.2; NMD-62A; Schou-14; Bruun-10167. Weight: 28.86 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik Grüner. 
EXCEEDINGLY SCARCE, this alluring Mint State example displays bright watercolor toning. Nice reserved 
brilliance shines through the lovely toning. Less handled than one might expect given the grade, and on the 
whole a very attractive and pleasing representative of this uncommon type.
€12,000-€15,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 310 ==========

Page 286 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 311 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 287
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Alluring 4 Speciedalers with Rich Mint State Luster and Charm
1224
NORW AY . 4 Speciedalers, 1680. Christiania Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-61. KM-129; Dav-A3654; Hede-
32B; Sieg-56.2; NMD-36; Schou-6; Bruun-10227. Weight: 114.50 gms. Mintmaster: Peter Grüner (PG). 
EXCEEDINGLY RARE and one of only 10 traced examples of Quadruple Speciedalers from Christian V , 
minted in 1674, 1678, 1679 and 1680. Of these, only four are privately owned, while the remaining six are 
to be found in public collections in Oslo, Copenhagen and St. Petersburg. Given the incredible rarity of this 
issue, this opportunity offers the chance to acquire an example for one’s collection that will catapult it into 
another league entirely. This hefty piece is well preserved, with the bold strike showing and no softening due 
to wear. Light brilliance is seen, with a touch of amber toning at the lower most peripheries. Some expected 
handling is observed, though this does little to dampen the general charm. A specimen largely without peer, 
and as such, a most desirable numismatic offering.
€250,000-€350,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Peter v. Hemmert Collection (Copenhagen - 2/1807) Lot # 1207.


========== PAGE 312 ==========

Page 288 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Mint State Gold Mark Pattern of the Highest Importance
1225
NORW AY . Gold Mark Pattern, 1684. Christiania Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-61. KM-cf. Pn29 (silver); 
Hede-18; Sieg-80; NMD-cf.122 (silver); Schou-1a; Bruun-10265. Weight: 9.15 gms. Mintmaster: Peter 
Grüner. A splendid representative that is EXTREMELY RARE when seen in gold. While examples do 
occasionally turn up in silver, no example has yet been traced in gold, highlighting the importance of this 
offering. Beautiful golden luster rises from the flan, showing exceptionally well when handled in the light. 
A weakly struck date and a limited amount of friction consistent for the grade assigned is seen, though this 
minor fault is just that, inconsequential to the overall eye appeal. While this Mark design is beautiful when 
displayed in the more common silver, when struck in gold, the piece is elevated to a new level of beauty and 
allure. An example that is certainly among the most important Norwegian numismatic offerings in the past 
decades, and as such, one that will command the requisite attention.
€80,000-€120,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Hans Henrik Frost Collection (Copenhagen - 3/1827) Lot # 57.

========== PAGE 313 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 289
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Beautifully Struck and Wonderfully Detailed Choice Speciedaler
1226
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1692. Kongsberg Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-63. KM-190; Dav-3659C; Hede-
37E; Sieg-59.3; NMD-168C; Schou-11; Bruun-10392. Weight: 28.73 gms. Mintmaster: Henning Christopher 
Meyer, the elder (HCM). Engraver: Caspar Barth. The single finest certified example of this date yet holdered 
by NGC, this alluring and most attractive representative yields handsome tone at the peripheries and nice 
brilliance in the open fields. This attractive design is well impressed, with surface interruptions being limited 
to a few light marks and some adjustments. A most beautiful example that is deserving of much adulation.
The edge bears the following lettering: DANNER KONGIS NORDSKE FIELDE SLIGE FRUGTER HAR I 
VÆLDE (“The Danish king’s Norwegian cliffs abound with such fruits”). By far most of the Speciedalers struck 
in Denmark/Norway in the 17th century were not made for regular circulation but for a use as presentation 
pieces or savings. The Norwegian Speciedalers with lettered edges are however notable exceptions, as a total 
of almost 100,000 is known to have been minted from 1692-1696. As opposed to being hammer struck, 
the Kongsberg Speciedalers were minted in a screw press after the lettering had already been applied to the 
planchets, which means that the reading direction and the starting point of the legends vary. There are seven 
known varieties of edge legends of which five are in Danish, one is in German and one is in Latin. They 
were all meant to glorify the Danish absolute monarch and celebrate the important occurrence of silver in 
the Norwegian cliffs around the new mint in Kongsberg that had taken over from Christiania in 1686. The 
phrases, which are extraordinarily high-flown and poetical, are believed to be by the vicar Jørgen Kongstad.
€6,000-€8,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 314 ==========

Page 290 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Choice Mint State and Extremely Rare Speciedaler
1227
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1693. Kongsberg Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-63. KM-192; Dav-3660B; Hede-
40B; Sieg-60.2; NMD-170B; Schou-17; Bruun-10411. Weight: 29.20 gms. Mintmaster: Henning Christopher 
Meyer, the older (HCM). Engraver: Caspar Barth. EXTREMELY RARE and most pleasing, this handsome 
Speciedaler is rich in silver luster with touches of light golden tone throughout. The details are well executed, 
and signs of handling or marks are limited. An example that certainly scores highly on the scale of attractiveness.
The edge bears the following lettering: DET KLIPPERNE YDER VOR BERGMAND UDBRYDER HVAD 
HYTTEN DA GYDER AF MYNTEN VI NYDER (“Hidden in the hills, mined by our men, flowing from the 
ovens, the silver is our wealth”).
€14,000-€18,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Alfred Benzon Collection (Copenhagen - 5/1887) Lot # 1907.

========== PAGE 315 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 291
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Handsome Mint State Speciedaler with 
Brilliant Luster and Handsome Mottled Tone
1228
NORW AY . 1/2 Speciedaler, 1693. Kongsberg Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-62. KM-191; Hede-38; Sieg-48; 
NMD-177; Schou-20; Bruun-10414. Weight: 14.26 gms. Mintmaster: Henning Christopher Meyer, the older 
(HCM). Engraver: Caspar Barth. Quite SCARCE and rather attractive, this handsome fractional Speciedaler 
delivers a resounding brilliance, with generous luster throughout. Mottled toning of numerous shades appears 
across the surfaces, with gold and blue being seen most frequently. Lightly handled, this alluring specimen is 
certainly strong on many attributes.
The edge bears the following lettering: SAADAN NORDENS SKAT GUD GIEMTE TIL KONG CHRISTIAN 
DEND FEMTE (“God hid this Nordic treasure for King Christian the Fifth’s pleasure”).
€10,000-€12,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 316 ==========

Page 292 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 317 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 293
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Bright and Handsome Choice Mint State Speciedaler 
with Rich Luster Throughout
One of Only Two Traced of this Type
1229
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1695. Kongsberg Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-63. KM-194; Dav-3661C; Hede-
39F; Sieg-61.6; NMD-175F; Schou-10; Bruun-10449. Weight: 29.35 gms. Mintmaster: Henning Christopher 
Meyer, the older (HCM). Engraver: Caspar Barth. One of only two recorded examples traced, this Choice 
Speciedaler delivers shining and reflective brilliance, with a general clarity to the details. Light and wispy 
golden tone adheres to the surfaces, and stray marks are uncommon, leaving the surface appearance largely 
cohesive and free of distracting marks. A piece that should demand much attention, given its alluring 
RARITY.
The edge bears the following very rare lettering: STORE KONGE NORDENS ÆRE LAD DE FRUGTER YNDIG 
VÆRE SOM DIG NORSKE KLIPPER BÆRE (“Great king, glory of the North, enjoy the fruits that the Norwegian 
cliffs bear”).
€20,000-€25,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Christian Jürgensen Thomsen Collection (Copenhagen - 1871) Lot # 1378. Although this provenance isn’t listed in 
the printed Bruun catalog published in 1928, it emerges clearly from the handwritten ledger of the Bille-Brahe collec-
tion at the National Museum.

========== PAGE 318 ==========

Page 294 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 319 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 295
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Alluring Double Ducat with Only Two Recorded Examples
1230
NORW AY . 2 Ducats, ND (1670-99). Christiania Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-61. Fr-8; KM-138; Hede-4; 
Sieg-64.2; NMD-10; Schou-14; Bruun-10497. Weight: 6.89 gms. Mintmaster: Frederik Grüner. With only 
two examples recorded, and the other being in the Danish National Museum, this piece offers the chance 
at a Double Ducat that is UNIQUE in private collections. Bright luster sloshes off the surfaces in a highly 
engaging and wholly original display. The details are nicely struck, with the grade arising from some noted 
friction and a touch of planchet roughness. Nonetheless, this example is certainly of superior eye appeal 
to much of the surviving Norwegian gold from this period. An exemplar that will doubtless draw much 
attention, as this may be the sole opportunity one is ever presented with to acquire this type.
€200,000-€250,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Carl F. Schubart Collection (Copenhagen - 1831) Lot # 1756.

========== PAGE 320 ==========

Page 296 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Choice Mint State 1/2 Ducat with Sunny Luster and Light Orange Tone
1231
NORW AY . 1/2 Ducat, ND (1670-99). Christiania Mint. Christian V . NGC MS-63. Fr-10; KM-103; Hede-
6; Sieg-62; NMD-21A; Schou-40; Bruun-10509. Weight: 1.71 gms. An EXTREMELY RARE 1/2 Ducat, this 
glowing Choice example is commendably struck up, with a generally bright appearance throughout. The 
details are refined and elegant, and the bright glowing luster shines and shimmers when held in the light, 
with touches of orange seen throughout. Light, mintmade adjustment marks are the only surface feature of 
note, though even these are light and hidden within the design elements. Beautiful and worthy of adulation.
€40,000-€60,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Possibly ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 321 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 297
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Exquisite Speciedaler with Stellar Eye Appeal and NGC Star Designation
1232
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1768. Kongsberg Mint. Christian VII. NGC MS-64★. KM-244; Dav-1304; Hede-
1; Sieg-16; NMD-3; Schou-1; FP-35.2; Bruun-10778. Weight: 28.84 gms. Mintmaster: Truels Andersen Lyng 
(TL). Engraver: Gabriel Andersen Lunder / Johan Ephraim Bauert. A RARELY seen issue, particularly when 
preserved in Mint State condition, with this Speciedaler claiming the title of the finest certified specimen of 
this date. Electric blue, lilac, and jet toning is seen, flanking the open fields that display a bright and mirrored 
luster. Some slight friction that melds with the as made dielines account for the technical grade assigned by 
NGC.
€40,000-€60,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 322 ==========

Page 298 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Immensely Pleasing Speciedaler at the Precipice of Gem Grade Status
1233
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1791. Kongsberg Mint. Christian VII. NGC MS-64+. KM-265.1; Dav-1313; Hede-
4B; Sieg-18.2; NMD-10A; Schou-3; FP-41.2; Bruun-10870. Weight: 28.89 gms. Mintmaster: Hans Jacob 
Arnold Branth (HIAB). Engraver: Anders Jonsen Lunde. Displaying a glorious eye appeal befitting a work 
of art, this handsome specimen glows with electric blue color that is dappled across the surfaces. Alternating 
between toned and untoned regions, this Speciedaler gives a shimmering appeal that catches the eyes when 
held in the light. A stunning specimen.
€6,000-€8,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 323 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 299
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Sublime and Gorgeous Plus-Graded Gem Speciedaler
1234
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1794. Kongsberg Mint. Christian VII. NGC MS-65+. KM-265.2; Dav-1314; Hede-
4E; Sieg-18.5; NMD-14; Schou-4; FP-41.5; Bruun-10878. Weight: 28.89 gms. Mintmaster: Hans Jacob Arnold 
Branth (HIAB). Engraver: Andersen Jonsen Lunde. Displaying a technical appeal that far outstrips nearly all 
other certified Speciedalers regardless of date, this example can claim the title of the sole finest representative 
yet holdered by NGC. A soft glistening cartwheel of light sloshes off the surfaces, with touches of supporting 
deep tone sprinkled around. An example that boasts a glorious appeal that is hard to match.
€14,000-€18,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 324 ==========

Page 300 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Electrifyingly Toned Near-Gem 1/3 Speciedaler
1235
NORW AY . 1/3 Speciedaler, 1803. Kongsberg Mint. Christian VII. NGC MS-64. KM-273; Hede-6C; Sieg-
12.3; NMD-30B; Schou-2; FP-28.4; Bruun-10924. Mintmaster: Johan Georg Madelung (IGM). Engraver: Peter 
(Pietro) Leonhard Gianelli (PG). Glowing with a tone that is as vivid as it is rare, this fractional Speciedaler 
glistens with a brilliant and vibrant luster on the reverse that is complemented by colorful azure, amethyst, 
and ruby highlights that sparkle and twinkle under the light on the obverse. We expect no shortage of active 
collectors seeking to add this tremendous one-year type to their holdings.
€10,000-€15,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Carl F. Schubart Collection (Copenhagen - 1831) Lot # 2448. Although this provenance isn’t listed in the printed 
Bruun catalog published in 1928, it emerges clearly from the handwritten ledger of the Bille-Brahe collection at the 
National Museum.

========== PAGE 325 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 301
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Premium Gem with Handsome Luster and Bold Colorful Toning
1236
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1824. Kongsberg Mint. Carl XIV Johan. NGC MS-66. KM-290; Sieg-16; NM-4; 
Dav-240; Bruun-10979. Weight: 28.90 gms. Mintmaster: Johan Michael Kruse (JMK). Engraver: Gregorius 
Middelthun (M). A premium Gem that radiates with a scattering of light that delivers effusive beauty to the 
eyes. The silver luster is interspersed with engrossing tone patterns that span several hues of blue, red, and 
yellow. The surfaces are clean of any consequential marks, giving this coin the appearance of a freshly minted 
piece.
€7,000-€8,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 326 ==========

Page 302 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Incredible Prooflike Speciedaler with Rich Frosting and Crisp Details
1237
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1848. Kongsberg Mint. Oscar I. NGC MS-65 Prooflike. KM-317; Sieg-6; NM-
3; Dav-243; Bruun-11050. Weight: 28.93 gms. Mintmaster: Casper Herman Langberg. Standing as the 
only specimen of this date to achieve a prooflike designation from NGC, this alluring crown alights with a 
garish display of color that is resolutely purple at the outermost peripheries and lightens through the visible 
spectrum with red and orange and finally cresting in soft silver at the centers. The details are well applied, 
with a richness of clarity that is simply not seen on the average example of the type. A must have for any 
serious collector of Speciedalers.
€6,000-€8,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 327 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 303
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Sole Finest Graded Superb-Gem 1/2 Speciedaler
1238
NORW AY . 1/2 Speciedaler, 1850. Kongsberg Mint. Oscar I. NGC MS-67.  KM-316; Sieg-5; NM-13; 
Bruun-11057. Weight: 14.44 gms. Mintmaster: Caspar Herman Langberg. Standing alone as the sole finest 
representative of the type, this 1/2 Spiecedaler displays brilliant luster across the open fields, and sanguine 
rainbow toning at the peripheries that waxes and wanes in intensity. Signs of handling are virtually nonexistent, 
as the luster gives a nearly prooflike appeal that rivals any fine work of art for beauty and allure.
€4,000-€6,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 328 ==========

Page 304 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Vibrant Gem Speciedaler with Mottled Technicolor Toning
1239
NORW AY . Speciedaler, 1861. Kongsberg Mint. Carl XV . NGC MS-65. KM-323; Sieg-13; NM-1B; Dav-244; 
Bruun-11072. Weight: 28.92 gms. Mintmaster: Caspar Herman Langberg. A Gem through and through, 
this exceptional crown-sized issue glistens with a soft alluring luster. Enticing toning clings to the surfaces, 
providing a visual contrast and catching the eyes. Only the very lightest blushes of friction are seen, with 
essentially no other faults of mention; leaving this as one of the finest specimens that one might hope to 
encounter.
€8,000-€10,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 329 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 305
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Appealing Gem 1861 1/2 Speciedaler Featuring a Frosty Charm
Only 500 Struck
1240
NORW AY . 1/2 Speciedaler, 1861. Kongsberg Mint. Carl XV . NGC MS-65. KM-322; Sieg-11; NM-8B; 
Bruun-11073. Weight: 14.42 gms. Mintmaster: Caspar Herman Langberg. Mintage: 500. Frosty and glowing 
with a sparkling appeal that is reminiscent of the icy glow of a diamond, this piece is appropriately a Gem, 
scoring very highly on on eye appeal and technical grade. Only a few wisps of toning are seen at the peripheries, 
with the lustrous frost never far removed. Here is a coin that defies expectations reaching a grade that no 
other example can claim. Very rarely seen for sale.
€8,000-€10,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.

========== PAGE 330 ==========

Page 306 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Chieftains, warlords, tribal judges, kings? It is difficult to put a label on the rulers of 
Dark Age Sweden, as precious few written sources exist from the time. We get glimpses 
of prehistory in the archaeological evidence as seen in the spectacular graves in Vendel 
and Valsjärta dating to the 6th century AD. With their immense riches and warriors’ 
equipment, they speak of a ruling warrior class, nobility, and perhaps kings. 
The first kings whose existence we can be sure of are Erik the Victorious and his son 
Oluf Skötkonung. They emerge during the Dark Ages in the late 10th century as Christi-
anity spread into Scandinavia, bringing with them writing, chronicles, and annals. Olof, 
who was the first Christian king of Sweden, also initiated the first minting of coins in 
Sweden. The coins are Pennies in the weight and style of the English Pennies that, at the 
time, flooded Scandinavia as Danegeld and Viking loot.
Gustav Vasa (1523-1560), who claimed Swedish independence from the Danes and 
ended the Kalmar Union, was a shrewd and dynamic figure whose lengthy reign saw the consolidation of central au-
thority—he put down several uprisings throughout his rule, and abolished the elective monarchy in 1544, replacing 
it with the hereditary variety. Gustav broke with the Catholic Church in lockstep with the Danes and Norwegians, 
establishing Protestantism as the national church in 1536, and gave Sweden nearly 40 years of stable governance.
He is considered one of Sweden’s greatest monarchs and is often described as a founding father of the modern Swed-
ish state. Three of his sons sat on the Swedish throne; Erik XIV (1650-1568), Johan III (1568-1592) and Karl IX 
(1604-1611).
The 17th century marks a turning point, as the balance of power in Scandinavia shifted in Sweden’s favor. Sweden 
joined the European Thirty Y ears’ War (1618-1648) under Gustav II Adolf (1611-1632) and claimed a string of vic-
tories and territory, mainly in Northeastern Europe but also in cities and lands as far away as Bavaria and the Rhine-
land. Some scholars claim Sweden was but a single battle from defeating the Holy Roman Emperor, in which case 
the map of Europe would look much different today. We get a glimpse of these spectacular war efforts in the many 
beautiful Swedish coins struck in cities like Riga, Elbing, and Szczecin – a wonderful testament to Sweden’s heyday.
In an unprecedented move, Gustav II Adolf ’s successor Queen Kristina (1632-1654) chose to abdicate the throne, 
moved to Rome, converted to Catholicism, and left the throne to her cousin (and suitor) Karl X Gustav (1654-1660). 
He continued to assert Swedish dominance on the Baltic and on Denmark, from which he claimed a third of the 
country, most of which is Swedish to this day.
The 18th century marked a period of absolutist rule under monarchs such as Charles XII (1697-1718) and Gustav 
III (1771-1792). Charles XII’s reign was dominated by military campaigns, including against Russia and Poland, but 
ended in defeat and territorial losses. The Treaty of Nystad was signed in 1721, which saw most of Sweden’s territorial 
possessions transferred to Russia, effectively bringing the Swedish Empire to an end. The concept of parliamentary 
governance and increasing civil rights were on the rise in the period after the Nystad Treaty. Gustav III attempted 
to strengthen royal authority and introduce Enlightenment reforms, but his efforts were curtailed by aristocratic re-
sistance and his assassination in 1792. His son, Gustav IV Adolf (1792-1809), was deposed in 1809 amid discontent 
over his foreign policy and Sweden’s loss of Finland to Russia.
In the early 19th century, one of Napoleon’s marshals ascended the Swedish throne. The general Jean-Baptiste Jules 
Bernadotte, who allegedly had a tattoo that read “death to kings, ” accepted the Swedish throne in 1818, four years af-
ter the Congress of Vienna and the Council of Kiel, where Sweden gained Norway from the Danes. Taking the name 
Carl XIV Johan (1818-1844), he initiated reforms aimed at modernizing Sweden’s economy and administration. The 
period also witnessed Sweden’s peaceful coexistence and occasional alliances within the Nordic region, notably with 
Norway and Denmark.
The late 19th and 20th centuries saw Sweden emerge as a neutral power in European geopolitics, maintaining a 
policy of armed neutrality during both World Wars. Kings Oscar II and Gustav V navigated Sweden through this 
difficult period, and the great-grandson of Gustav V , Carl XVI Gustav, has sat on the throne since 1973.
THE SWEDISH MONARCHY
King Gustav I of Sweden.
THE COINAGE OF SWEDEN

========== PAGE 331 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 307
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Evenly Handled and Deeply Toned 1534 Riksdaler
The First Taler of Sweden
1241
SWEDEN. Riksdaler, 1534. Stockholm Mint. Gustav Vasa. NGC VF-30. MB-48; Dav-8692; SM-106(99); 
Delzanno-7: Hagander-3; Appelgren-479;  Bruun auction-370; Bruun-11443. Weight: 28.88 gms. “Crown” 
variation. This is the first Taler of Sweden, struck in the style and size of the Joachimstalers by the counts of 
Schlick. It also marks the transformation of Swedish coinage from medieval coinage. The enigmatic mintmark 
on the reverse, resembling an ear, is yet to be attributed to a mintmaster. Few pieces have survived to this 
day; most were probably melted down to produce Talers of inferior silver content, as the Swedish standard 
dropped from the then approximately 28 grams to 25.6 grams as early as 1542. While the coin does show 
signs of wear, the reverse clearly rises above the numeric grade, and the reddish-brown toning with hints of 
blue to the obverse enhances the details to make this a most pleasing example. 
As the first Taler of Sweden and from the King who secured Swedish independence the importance of this rare 
and coveted type cannot be overstated.
€15,000-€25,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Johan Scharp Collection (Stockholm - 1851/1853) Lot # 165.

========== PAGE 332 ==========

Page 308 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 333 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 309
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Appealing and Minimally Handled Triple Riksdaler
1242
SWEDEN. 3 Riksdaler, ND (1587). Stockholm Mint. Johan III. NGC AU-53. Dav-LS570; SM-18(18); 
Delzanno-4: not in Hagander (attributes the coinage to the Vadstena Mint); Bruun auction-cf. 508; 
Bruun-11642. Weight: 87.26 gms. Mintmaster: Gillis (Julius) Coyet the elder. While Double and Single Talers 
of this impressive type frequently appear in public auctions, the higher denominations such as this 3 Riksdaler 
are VERY RARE. The elusiveness of the 4 and 3 Riksdalers is underscored by the fact that only one example 
has traded in the recent past, a 4 Riksdaler that was offered in 2021. The 3 Riksdaler has most likely only been 
offered once since the magnificent Oldenburg Collection sold in Stockholm in 1889. This example is nothing 
short of a handsome and pleasing representative, with soft steely gray brilliance and pockets of charming 
color interluding the gray appeal. An elusive opportunity, and one that should not be taken lightly, given it 
may be years or decades before another similarly denominated example appears. 
For completeness we note the original Bruun catalog (in error) has denominated this issue a 4 Riksdaler, though 
the weight is consistent for that of a 3 Riksdaler.
€30,000-€40,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 334 ==========

Page 310 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Warm and Handsome About Uncirculated Riksdaler 
of Karl IX the Duke of Sodermanland
1243
SWEDEN. Riksdaler, 1597. Stockholm Mint. Karl (IX), Duke of Sodermanland. NGC AU-55.  Dav-
8712; SM-14(14); Delzanno-10: Hagander-45 (die match); Bruun auction-651; Bruun-11682. Weight: 28.83 
gms. This Riksdaler is the only denomination struck in Stockholm by Karl IX as duke, and all his coins are 
rare today. It is the first Swedish coin to have supporters for the shield, a feature that became standard on 
Riksdalers from 1654 to 1748; we do note the lion tucking his tail between his legs, an intriguing feature. The 
surfaces display a warm appeal, with nice strike quality and soft amber hues throughout. A piece that presents 
quite nicely, and as such, one that will capture much attention.
€15,000-€25,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 335 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 311
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Beautiful and Virtually as Struck 16 Mark
1244
SWEDEN. Gold 16 Mark, 1610. Stockholm Mint. Karl IX. NGC MS-61. Fr-19: KM-25; SM-18(18); SG-
13: Hagander-54; Bruun-11728. Weight: 4.65 gms. Presenting the appearance of an as-struck example, this 
beautiful Mint State Ducat delivers brilliant luster. The details are well-defined and escape any signs of major 
handling or fault, with the surfaces largely unbroken. The flan is even and consistent, with no irregularities or 
flaws seen. An enchanting golden RARITY that will doubtlessly attract much attention on account of both 
its elusiveness and beauty.
The 16 Marks were struck on gold from Hungarian Gulden paid as duty on goods entering Sweden.
€15,000-€20,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: August C. Mohr Collection (Copenhagen 11/1847) Lot # 4228.

========== PAGE 336 ==========

Page 312 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 337 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 313
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Impressively Preserved and Problem Free 16 Mark
1245
SWEDEN. Gold 16 Mark, 1615. Stockholm Mint. Gustav II Adolf. NGC AU-53.  Fr-28: KM-68; SM-
5(6); SG-6: Hagander-65; Bruun-11749. Weight: 4.95 gms. Mintmaster: Gillis (Julius) Coyet the younger. 
An EXTREMELY RARE one-year type (Hagander mentions ‘an insignificant emission’) with probably no 
more than four specimens in private hands. This lightly handled 16 Mark offers a pleasing eye appeal and is 
rather handsome. The coin exudes a soft brilliance, with the luster most notable in the protected areas of the 
design. Wear is limited to the highest portions of the design, and the flan is charmingly free of major flaws or 
marking. An impressive piece on both preservation and rarity.
€40,000-€50,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Danish National Museum Duplicates (Copenhagen - 5/1883)
Ex: J. Siökrona Collection; later purchased en bloc by the Royal Danish Coins and Medals Collection and the dupli-
cates sold at auction.

========== PAGE 338 ==========

Page 314 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Beautifully Lustrous and Peripherally Toned 2 Riksdaler
1246
SWEDEN. 2 Riksdaler, 1633. Stockholm Mint. Gustav II Adolf. NGC MS-62. KM-156; Dav-LS585; SM-
27(22); Delzanno-11; not in Hagander; Bruun auction-783; Bruun-11904. Weight: 56.77 gms. Sometimes 
attributed to Augsburg in Bavaria, Germany, the obverse of this impressive Double Taler shows the king 
on a prancing horse, a lovely view of the city of Augsburg in the background, while the reverse shows the 
royal coat of arms surrounded by an impressive array of 30 smaller coats or arms of Swedish provinces. 
An unbelievably well preserved specimen dated the year after the king’s death, and a coin whose beauty is 
perhaps only surpassed by its rarity.
€30,000-€40,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Alex A. Fröling Collection (Stockholm - 1857) Lot # 239.


========== PAGE 339 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 315
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Immaculately Preserved Riksdaler of Axel Oxenstierna
1247
SWEDEN. Würzburg. Riksdaler, ND (1633-34). Axel Oxenstierna (Count of Södermanland). NGC MS-
63. KM-8; Dav-4561; SB-15; Delzanno-461; Hagander-143; Bruun-11914. Weight: 29.09 gms. Mintmaster 
Conrad Stutz. EXTREMELY RARE, this stunning Riksdaler bears the face and name of Axel Oxenstierna, 
Swedish Chancellor since 1612. The surfaces glow with a bright glassy luster and are complimented by 
touches of highlighting toning. The details are beautifully executed, with a crisp strike quality that is largely 
undisturbed. A stunningly beautiful piece, and one that deserves the attention of many. 
On the Death of Gustav Adolf at the Battle of Lützen, Oxenstierna seized control of the state for the then 6-year old 
heir to the throne, Kristina. Shortly after, Oxenstierna led the Protestant Heilbrunn League to a series of victories  
over the Catholic armies of the Holy Roman Empire. The coin is unique in early modern European coin history 
as it bears his name, visage, and title as leader of the league. No other coin from that time depicts politicians, and 
an extraordinary politician he was instrumental in numerous important peace treaties, including the Peace of 
Westphalia in 1648 that ended the Thirty Years’ War. Oxenstierna held his office until his death in 1654.
€30,000-€35,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Leon Mikocki Collection (J. Bermann & Sohn, Vienna - 1850), Lot # 3430.

========== PAGE 340 ==========

Page 316 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 341 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 317
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Beautiful Mint State 2 Ducats Struck at the Riga Mint
1248
SWEDEN. Swedish Livonia. Riga. 2 Ducats, 1643. Riga Mint. Kristina. NGC MS-60.  Fr-9A; KM-
28; SB-35; SG-46; not in Hagander; Bruun-11983. Weight: 6.82 gm. Moneyer: Henrik Wulff (HW). An 
EXCEEDINGLY RARE one-year coinage struck when Kristina was just 17, which predates her coronation 
by 7 years. A phenomenal Double Ducat, this type is a preeminent numismatic treasure from the Baltic, 
displaying bright reflectivity that illuminates the surfaces. The details are powerfully impressed on the flan, 
with no real evidence of shift that is quite common on coins of this period. Friction likely accounts for the 
grade assigned, though this is actually less severe than one might expect for the technical grade, as contact 
marks are limited. A stunning gold issue that unites the numismatic history of Sweden, Poland, and Latvia, 
and as such a coin whose importance cannot be overstated. The scarcity of this coin is underlined by the 
fact that the 2019 ‘Gold Coins from Sweden’ book only shows a gritty black and white photograph of it, as 
apparently no recent photos could be found.
Under Swedish rule from 1621 to 1710 the city of Riga, now the capital of Latvia, was the second largest city in 
the Swedish realm and immensely important both strategically and economically.
€30,000-€40,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection  
(Private Sale - 1922).
Collection of cathedrals in the city of Riga, 1650.

========== PAGE 342 ==========

Page 318 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Appealing Swedish Livonian Riksdaler from Riga Featuring Kristina
1249
SWEDEN. Swedish Livonia. Riga. Riksdaler, 1645/4. Riga Mint. Kristina. NGC MS-62. KM-33; Dav-4594; 
SB-47; Delzanno-343; Hagander-193; Bruun auction-1098; Bruun-11994. Weight: 28.83 gms. Mintmaster: 
Henrik Wulff (HW). The Taler emissions from Riga are all rarities, and finding one in anything above VF is 
an arduous task. The surfaces are rich with a lustrous eye appeal, and handsome toning besets the peripheries. 
A slight touch of friction accounts for the assigned grade, though this is not distracting in any major way. 
Clear evidence of reworking of the date is visible even without magnification, with the last digit providing a 
somewhat stylistically unsophisticated 5/4 hybrid. The numeric grade this specimen has been given puts it far 
above and beyond any rivals it might have.
€15,000-€20,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Leon Mikocki Collection (J. Bermann & Sohn, Vienna - 1850), Lot # 3479.

========== PAGE 343 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 319
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Extremely Rare 5 Ducats from Swedish Livonia
1250
SWEDEN. Swedish Livonia. Riga. 5 Ducats, “1645” (1654). Karl X Gustav. NGC AU Details—Holed.  
Fr-16; KM-51; SB-75a; SG-30; Hagander-226; Bruun auction-1205; Bruun-12082. Weight: 17.12 gms. 
Mintmaster: Henrik Wulff. Engraver: Sebastian Dadler (SD). With an impressive city and harbor view of 
Riga on the reverse, this Quintuple Ducat is a strong reminder of Sweden’s enormous influence in the Eastern 
Baltics in the 17th century. 1654 was the year Karl XI ascended the throne after Kristina, his predecessor and 
cousin, abdicated. Despite having been holed for former usage as jewelry, this example retains pleasing detail 
within the captivating designs.
€10,000-€15,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 344 ==========

Page 320 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 345 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 321
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Stunning Ducat with Rich Luster From Elbing
1251
SWEDEN. Elbing. Ducat, 1657. Karl X Gustav. NGC MS-64. Fr-49; KM-71; SB-46; SG-19; Kop-9682 (R8); 
not in Hagander; Bruun-12104. Weight: 3.46 gms. Mintmaster: Nicholaus Henning (NH). Struck during the 
second seizing of the important Polish city Elbing on the Baltic coast between 1655-1660, this alluring Ducat 
stands at the boundary of Polish, Prussian and Swedish issues, appealing to all three groups of collectors. 
Of those examples that are easily traced through public auctions, we have been able to find only one other 
specimen that has traded twice. This example far surpasses that one with its bold luster and crisp details. 
The fabric of the piece is very similar 
to contemporary John Casimir Polish 
Ducats, with the slight die shift and 
reflectivity in the open fields. No mark 
of consequence are seen on the surfaces, 
and much die polish lines are present. A 
Ducat that is nearly all things: beautiful, 
historically important, and from a 
popular period.
€40,000-€50,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection 
(Private Sale - 1922).
Panorama of the historical city of Elbing, 1648.

========== PAGE 346 ==========

Page 322 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Beautiful 2 Ducats from Pomerania
1252
SWEDEN. Pomerania. 2 Ducats, 1658. Szczecin Mint. Karl X Gustav. NGC AU-58. Fr-2109; KM-222; SB-
29; SG-23; Hagander-222; Bruun auction-1211; Bruun-12114. Weight: 6.90 gms. Mintmaster: Ulrich Butkau. 
A great RARITY, this nicely presented 2 Ducats from the period of Swedish Occupation of Pomerania delivers 
good luster, with sharp details throughout. Only a light touch of wear is seen on the elevated portions of the 
design, with limited strike weakness. Some minor disturbances on the edge are also noted for completeness. 
A popular issue, due to the crossover appeal between Sweden, Poland, and Germany; this coin stands at 
the confluence of these nation’s histories, and provides a historical memento of the Swedish Occupation of 
Pomerania.
Szczecin or Stettin, on the Oder river 
just 40 Miles from the Baltic Sea, lies 
on the Polish/German border and 
has held strategic importance for 
centuries.
€15,000-€20,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde  
Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Engraving of Szczecin, Poland, 1642.

========== PAGE 347 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 323
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Alluring Mint State Taler from the Swedish Occupation of Pomerania
1253
SWEDEN. Pomerania. Taler, 1675. Szczecin Mint. Karl XI. NGC MS-61.  KM-271; Dav-4580; SB-84; 
Delzanno-748; Kopicki-9902; Bruun auction-1539; Bruun-12333. Weight: 28.98 gms. Mintmaster: Daniel 
Syvertz (DS). The obverse is tinged with golden hues and the reverse, with its rich imagery, the casually 
reclining hairy wild men, and where every little detail is so exquisitely well-preserved, truly makes this is a 
masterpiece of artistry.  A very rarely traded coin in immaculate condition.
€25,000-€30,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 348 ==========

Page 324 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Supremely Attractive Plus Graded Riksdaler with Charming Color
1254
SWEDEN. Riksdaler, 1676. Stockholm Mint. Karl XI. NGC MS-63+.  KM-280; Dav-4538; SM-55a(52a); 
Delzanno-1; Bruun auction-1241; Bruun-12340. Weight: 29.66 gms. Mintmaster Daniel Faxell. Engraver: 
Hindrich Zedritz. The highest graded by NGC, beautifully toned, especially on the obverse where the gold 
and rainbow hues elevate this incredibly well-preserved coin into an artwork that is a collaboration between 
the artist, the metal, and time itself.
€25,000-€30,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 349 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 325
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Bright and Reflective Ducat of Karl XI
1255
SWEDEN. Ducat, 1695. Stockholm Mint. Karl XI. NGC MS-61.  Fr-45; KM-283; SM-52(49); SG-64; 
Bruun-12529. Weight: 3.48 gms. Mintmaster: Anders Strömner (AS). Engraver: Arvid Karlsteen. VERY 
RARE with one a few traded over the last decades. This Ducat is exceedingly beautiful, with bright luster and 
a brilliant reflectivity. Unlike both the Hagander and the Ljunggren pieces, this one has not been bent, further 
adding to its desirability.
€7,000-€12,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Axel A. Fröling Collection (Stockholm - 1857) Lot # 321.
Stockholm as seen in 1693.

========== PAGE 350 ==========

Page 326 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Beautiful Nearly-Choice Ducat with Appealing Reflective Luster
Struck in Commemoration of the Gold Discovery at Östra Silverberget
1256
SWEDEN. Ducat, 1695. Stockholm Mint. Karl XI. NGC MS-62.  Fr-47; KM-unlisted; SM-54(51); SG-
67; Hagander-267; Bruun auction-1238; Bruun-12530. Weight: 3.47 gms. Mintmaster: Anders Strömner. 
Engraver: Arvid Karlsteen. “Gripenhjelms Ducat” , struck by regional governor Boran Nils Gripenhielm, 
commemorates the discovery of gold at the Östra Silverberget in Dalarna 1695. This is the first time the origin 
of the gold is mentioned on a Swedish coin. Only a handful are known to exist outside of public collections.
€20,000-€25,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: J. Scharp Collection (Stockholm - 1851/1853) Lot # 890.

========== PAGE 351 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 327
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Beautifully Designed 2 Ducats from the Elusive Szczecin Mint
1257
SWEDEN. Pomerania. 2 Ducats, 1697. Szczecin Mint. Karl XI. NGC MS-61. Fr-2117; KM-342; SB-60; SG-
85; Hagander-280; Kopicki-9942; Bruun auction-1534; Bruun-12552. Weight: 6.94 gms.  Mintmaster: Julius 
Christian Arensburg. Szczecin (or Stettin) was the capitol of Swedish Pomerania from the Peace at Westphalia 
in 1648 till the downfall of Karl XII in 1720 during which time the city was heavily fortified and also besieged 
several times. The reverse of this Mint State Ducat, lustrous, beautiful and VERY RARE, shows a sheaf on top 
of which lies the royal regalia. To the right in the background, on this particular variation, a charming little 
church is seen.
€10,000-€15,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 352 ==========

Page 328 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Nearly Mint 1702 Double Ducat with Commendable Details
The First Swedish Double Ducat
1258
SWEDEN. 2 Ducats, 1702. Stockholm Mint. Karl XII. NGC AU-58.  Fr-48; KM-332; SM-1(1); SG-1; 
Hagander-303; Bruun auction-1667; Bruun-12600. Weight: 6.93 gms. Mintmaster: Henrik Zedritz (HZ). 
Engraver: Arvid Karlsteen. A technically brilliant Double Ducat, one cannot understate the appeal of this 
example, as it falls just short of a lofty Mint State grade on account of light wear on the cheek. The finely 
imparted details are impressive, with a particular clarity that is often missing on gold of this period. Only light 
brushes of friction, wholly consistent for the grade, are seen in the fields that are largely free of the usually 
peppering of marks.
This coin is a milestone in Swedish numismatics as it is the first double Ducat struck in Sweden.
€25,000-€30,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 353 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 329
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Stunning Nearly Mint State Riksdaler with Striking Portrait of Karl XII
First Regular Issue Swedish Coinage with Lettered Edge
1259
SWEDEN. Riksdaler, 1718. Stockholm Mint. Karl XII. NGC AU-58.  KM-362; Dav-1716; SM-29a(29a); 
Delzanno-6; Hagander-332; Bruun auction-1683; Bruun-12708. Weight: 29.23 gms. Mintmaster: Lorentz 
Careelberg. Edge lettering: MANIBVS NE LAEDAR AV ARIS (“May I not be damaged by avaricious hands”).
The first regular Swedish coinage to be issued with edge lettering. A marvelous and entrancing crown-sized 
issue, this glorious and appealing Riksdaler generates immediate draw and eye appeal on account of the rich 
toning and gentle underlying luster. Actual evidence of handling is extremely limited, with only the most 
cursory traces of wear on the highest design elements. Finding any example of a similar caliber would be an 
exceptionally difficult task, and as such, we expect intense bidding for collectors seeking such a pleasing piece. 
On this issue, the engraver Hedlinger mistook the arms of Cleve as containing a star when it was in fact eight 
fleur de lis, and the reverse was engraved as such. This mistake was later rectified to properly reflect the arms of 
Cleve.
€5,000-€8,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 354 ==========

Page 330 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History


========== PAGE 355 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 331
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Stunning 1723 Gem Riksdaler Struck from 1/2 Riksdaler Dies
Approximately 32 Struck
1260
SWEDEN. Riksdaler, 1723. Stockholm Mint. Fredrik I. NGC MS-65. KM-394; Dav-Unlisted; SM-61(59); 
Delzanno-9; Hagander-392; Bruun-12756. Weight: 29.16 gms. Edge lettering: MANIBVS NE LAEDAR 
AV ARIS (“May I not be damaged by avaricious hands”). Approximate Mintage: 32. Originating from the 
so-called “Krell” coinage, a series produced under the aegis of Paul Krell with 1/2 Riksdaler dies struck in 
double weight. The special care in production of this type is evident, with details boldly applied to the glossily 
lustrous flan. Mottled tone highlights the surfaces, with a soft steely gray seen in the open fields and more 
vibrant blue and purples around the devices and legends. When held in the light, the surfaces swim and dance 
with vibrance, and surfaces are clean as the Gem grade would suggest. A coin with a regal look that should 
command a royal price.
€40,000-€50,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).


========== PAGE 356 ==========

Page 332 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Alluring Mint State Ducat with Strong Luster
1261
SWEDEN. Ducat, 1726. Stockholm Mint. Fredrik I. NGC MS-62. Fr-58; KM-398; SM-10(10): SG-18; not 
in Hagander; Bruun-12769. Weight: 3.48 gms. Mintmaster: Esaias Zedritz. Mintage: 1,283. An EXTREMELY 
RARE type that is hardly ever seen in auction, with this particular date likely the rarest. Demonstrating 
alluring eye appeal and charm, this nearly-Choice Ducat demonstrates a brilliant essence of soft luster that 
is more reserved than flashy. The strike is nice, with only a touch of weakness on the higher elements of the 
design. As one of the more uncommon Swedish Ducats, this handsome example certainly does not lack for 
appeal.
€10,000-€20,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: C. P . Humble Collection (Stockholm - 1852) Lot # 785.

========== PAGE 357 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 333
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Lovely Mint State 1727 2 Riksdaler
Only 63 Pieces Struck
1262
SWEDEN. 2 Riksdaler, 1727. Stockholm Mint. Fredrik I. NGC MS-61. KM-400; Dav-1721; SM-58b(56); 
Delzanno-3; not in Hagander; Bruun auction-1854; Bruun-12775. Weight: 57.96 gms. Edge lettering: 
MANIBVS NE LAEDAR AV ARIS (“May I not be damaged by avaricious hands”). Mintmaster: Esaias Zedritz, 
engraver: Daniel Haesling. Mintage: 63. EXCEEDINGLY RARE and so thoroughly engrossing and engaging 
is this 2 Riksdaler that it leaves one with a sense of wonderment and awe. The impressive heft of the piece is 
evidence upon handling it, with the rich details being well-applied, with only a few light wisps of weakness. 
Dusky tone clings to the surfaces, with luster shining through, and flashes of light plum and peach color 
accenting the overall battleship gray. About as handsome or desirable as any coin to have ever been produced 
by Sweden, and consequently, near the top of the desirability scale. 
€30,000-€40,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).


========== PAGE 358 ==========

Page 334 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Alluring Gem Mint State Ducat of Fredrik the First
1263
SWEDEN. Ducat, 1728. Stockholm Mint. Fredrik I. NGC MS-65. Fr-59; KM-A401; SM-13(13); SG-21; 
Hagander-353; Bruun auction-1829; Bruun-12780. Weight: 3.46 gms. Mintmaster: Esaias Zwdritz; engraver: 
Johann Carl Hedlinger. Mintage: 2,874. A stunningly lustrous Gem, this Ducat glows with a shining appeal, 
with soft brilliance emanating from the flan and a generally sunny color. The details are alluring, with good 
strike quality on a flan that still shows many original die striations, some of the only notable features on 
surfaces that pleasingly free of marks. A Ducat that looks essentially as nice as it did the day it was struck.
€10,000-€15,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 359 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 335
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Handsome and Bright Gem Mint State 1746 Ducat with Vivid Luster
Struck in Gold from the Ädelfors Mine
1264
SWEDEN. Ducat, 1746. Stockholm Mint. Fredrik I. NGC MS-65.  Fr-67a; KM-438; SM-36(36); SG-60; 
Hagander-374; Bruun-12909. Weight: 3.48 gms. Mintmaster: Hans Malmberg (HM). Engraver: Daniel 
Fehrman. Struck in gold from the Ädelfors mine in the province of Småland with a low mintage of 243, this 
Ducat delivers a visual appeal in addition to its  RARITY. The vivid luster glows and shines, with a cutting 
appeal that that warms the eyes with a vivid glow. A true Gem through and through.
€10,000-€20,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Johan Scharp Collection (Stockholm - 1851/1853) Lot # 1081.

========== PAGE 360 ==========

Page 336 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Appealing Nearly-Gem 1/2 Ducat with Vivid Luster and Much Brilliance
Struck with Gold Taken from the Ädelfors Mine
1265
SWEDEN. 1/2 Ducat, 1747. Stockholm Mint. Fredrik I. NGC MS-64.  Fr-68a; KM-440; SM-49(49); SG-
68; Hagander-385; Bruun-12920. Weight: 1.74 gms. Mintmaster: Hans Malmberg (HM). Engraver Daniel 
Fehrman. Minted from gold from the Ädelfors mine in the province of Småland, this entrancing 1/2 Ducat 
displays exceedingly alluring luster, with a vivid shine and a touch of frostiness to the devices. The finely 
formed details in the Royal Orb and the Portraiture are exquisite and the surfaces present near-Gem quality. 
A fractional Ducat that has all the merits one could wish for in any single coin.
€15,000-€20,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Johan Scharp Collection (Stockholm - 1851/1853) Lot # 1084.

========== PAGE 361 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 337
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Alluring Riksdaler of Fredrik I with Wholesome Luster and Soft Toning
1266
SWEDEN. Riksdaler, 1748. Stockholm Mint. Fredrik I. NGC MS-65.  KM-443; Dav-1729; SM-91a(89); 
Delzanno-60; Hagander-427; Bruun auction-1878; Bruun-12930. Weight: 28.98 gms. Edge lettering: 
MANIBVS NE LAEDAR AV ARIS (“May I not be damaged by avaricious hands”). Mintmaster: Hans 
Malmberg (HM). Engraver Daniel Fehrman. About as impressive as a Gem example can come, this stunning 
Riksdaler displays toning of varied strength throughout, with handsome violet and amber toning that 
provides a mottled contrast to the nicely lustrous surfaces. The finer details are exceedingly well-engraved and 
struck, providing testament to the artistry of the piece. Finding even the most cursory of marks or handling is 
virtually impossible, with the surfaces providing a clean appeal of largely unimpeded beauty. 
The reverse design with the date ‘D. 17 APR. ’ commemorates the institution of the Order of the Seraphim that 
year. Only 209 copies were struck of this exceptionally rare coin: 100 of this variation, which was minted in 1748, 
and another 109 pieces minted in January 1749 with a new reverse die.
€15,000-€20,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Johan Scharp Collection (Stockholm - 1851/1853) Lot # 1089.

========== PAGE 362 ==========

Page 338 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Impressive Ducat Struck with Gold From the East Indies
1267
SWEDEN. Ducat, 1750. Stockholm Mint. Fredrik I. NGC MS-63+.  Fr-66; KM-458; SM-42(42); SG-54; 
Hagander-379; Bruun auction-1842; Bruun-12944. Weight: 3.46 gms. Mintmaster: Hans Malmberg (HM). 
Engraver: Daniel Fehrman. The rising sun on the reverse indicates that the gold used for this mintage was 
obtained in the East Indies, adding a distinguishing touch and uniting the collecting interests of those who 
pursue coinage from both Europe and Asia. Conditionally, this Ducat is unsurpassed on the NGC Census, 
being the sole finest representative of the ever-popular type. The rising sun motif is most apt, given the sunny 
nature of the surfaces that largely escape any major signs of handling or contact. A piece that reaches out and 
grabs the attention of all those collectors of rare golden treasures.
€10,000-€15,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: C. P . Humble (Stockholm - 1852) Lot # 789.

========== PAGE 363 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 339
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Handsome Near-Gem Ducat Featuring Shimmering Luster
1268
SWEDEN. Ducat, 1762. Stockholm Mint. Adolf Fredrik. NGC MS-64.  Fr-69; KM-465; SM-21(21); SG-
12; Hagander-443; Bruun-13033. Weight: 3.46 gms. Mintmaster: Albrekt Lindberg (AL). Engraver: Daniel 
Fehrman. A handsome near-Gem, this enticing Ducat delivers rich luster, with shimmering beauty and allure 
throughout. Nicely struck as well, this most pleasing example certainly does not lack for blustery beauty.
€10,000-€20,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Alex A. Fröling Collection (Stockholm - 1857) Lot # 443.

========== PAGE 364 ==========

Page 340 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Alluring Near-Gem with Bold Strike and Handsome Luster
1269
SWEDEN. Ducat, 1771. Stockholm Mint. Gustav III. NGC MS-64.  Fr-74; KM-510; SM-1(1); SG-1; 
Hagander-484; Bruun-13087.  Weight: 3.47 gms. Mintmaster: Albrekt Lindberg (AL). Engraver: Carl Gustaf 
Fehrman. An EXTREMELY RARE Ducat with a mintage of 2,255, most of which were melted down; this 
example is the only such of this date certified by NGC. Given its already lofty status, this Ducat would be 
desirable in any grade, however this specimen goes beyond a mere average example, being exceptionally 
detailed in near-Gem preservation. Sharply struck and well-detailed, the tiny traces of friction are worth only 
a passing mention, leaving this as a most deserving representative of numerous premium bids.
€7,000-€10,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
Ex: Alex A. Fröling Collection (Stockholm - 1857) Lot # 446.

========== PAGE 365 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 341
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Alluring Plus Graded Riksdaler with Impressively Preserved Details
1270
SWEDEN. Riksdaler, 1772. Stockholm Mint. Gustav III. NGC MS-65+.  KM-509; Dav-1734; SM-38(38); 
Delzanno-3; Hagander-514; Bruun auction-2055; Bruun-13090. Weight: 29.35 gms. Portrait of 1772. Edge 
lettering: MANIBVS NE LAEDAR AV ARIS (“May I not be damaged by avaricious hands”). Mintmaster: 
Albrekt Lindberg (AL). Engraver Carl Gustaf Fehrman. A precisely produced Gem, this Riksdaler is 
beautifully detailed and the as-made dielines provide a touch of character to the surfaces. Colorful toning is 
seen in different locations, most vibrantly at the legends and in the protected areas of the design. It should not 
be a surprise that NGC has not seen a finer example of this date. 
€4,000-€5,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 366 ==========

Page 342 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Handsome Gem Ducat with Vibrant Luster and Clear Details
1271
SWEDEN. Ducat, 1795. Stockholm Mint. Gustav IV Adolf. NGC MS-65.  Fr-76; KM-541; SM-3(3); SG-
3; Hagander-537; Bruun-1317. Weight: 3.49 gms. Mintmaster: Olof Lidijn (OL). Engraver: Carl Gustaf 
Fehrman. A beautiful Gem, this Ducat glitters and glows with a vibrant luster that can only come from fine 
gold. The sparkle is enhanced by a good deal of reflectivity in the fields, with largely intact luster that one often 
encounters on such highly designated coins.
€10,000-€12,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 367 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 343
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Handsome Choice Ducat Struck with Gold from the Ädelfors Mine
1272
SWEDEN. Ducat, 1796. Stockholm Mint. Gustav IV Adolf. NGC MS-63. Fr-78; KM-546; SM-5(5); SG-20; 
Hagander-540; Bruun auction-2108; Bruun-13181. Weight: 3.46 gms. Mintmaster Olof Lidijn (OL). Engraver: 
Carl Gustav Fehrman. Minted from gold from the Ädelfors mine in the province of Småland. A piece that 
is wholly Choice and worthy of much adulation, this Ducat is brightly lustered, with a glowing sheen that 
charms and appeals. Some slight peripheral weakness is noted, with an area of flatness near 9 o’ clock on the 
obverse rims. A most beautiful example with only a handful known in private collections.
€25,000-€30,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 368 ==========

Page 344 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Alluring Gustav IV Ducat with Star Designation from NGC
1273
SWEDEN. Ducat, 1800. Stockholm Mint. Gustav IV Adolf. NGC MS-66★. Fr-77; KM-542; SM-9(9); SG-
10; Hagander-545; Bruun-13190. Weight: 3.48 gms. Mintmaster: Olof Lidijn (OL). Engraver: Lars Grandel. 
Stunning and engrossing, this Ducat displays a brilliant luster that is devoid of handling or any marks of 
consequence. When holding this piece, one cannot help but be struck by its overwhelming beauty, and this 
feeling is confirmed by the special “star” grade modifier.
€7,000-€10,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 369 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 345
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Alluring and Brightly Lustrous 1804 Ducat 
Struck from Gold Mined in Dalarna
1274
SWEDEN. Ducat, 1804. Stockholm Mint. Gustav IV Adolf. NGC MS-65.  Fr-80; KM-567; SM-15(15); 
SG-22; Hagander-551; Bruun auction-2112; Bruun-13208. Weight: 3.47 gms. Mintmaster: Olof Lidijn (OL). 
Engraver: Lars Grandel. A RARE variant (mintage: 1,254) minted in gold from the Swedish province of 
Dalarna, this Ducat can add beauty to its list of attributes. Lustrous and glistening with a sunny luster, and 
no sign of fault seen excepting the slightest imperfections under magnification. About as sharp as one might 
expect to see a Ducat of this period, this example stands alone as the sole finest representative on the NGC 
census.
€12,000-€16,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 370 ==========

Page 346 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Plus Graded Gem Ducat from Karl XIII
1275
SWEDEN. Ducat, 1810. Stockholm Mint. Karl XIII. NGC MS-65+.  Fr-83; KM-582; SM-2(2); SG-
9; Hagander-568; Bruun auction-2155; Bruun-13237. Weight: 3.48 gms. Mintmaster: Olof Lidijn (OL). 
Engraver: Lars Grandel. Another RARE type (mintage: 1,322) minted in gold from the Swedish province of 
Dalarna as indicated by the arms on the reverse. A lovely Gem specimen, this entrancing and alluring Ducat 
generates immense charm from its glittering luster. Slight frostiness is seen on the design elements, with a 
technical preservation that exceeds the standard Gem, as evidenced by the “+” grade.
€15,000-€20,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 371 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 347
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Impressive 1838 4 Ducats with Prooflike Appearance
Only 625 Pieces Struck
1276
SWEDEN. 4 Ducats, 1838. Stockholm Mint. Karl XIV Johan. NGC MS-64. Fr-85; KM-645; SM-2(2); SG-2; 
Hagander-584; Bruun-13388. Weight: 13.93 gms. Mintmaster: Alexander Grandinson (AG). Engraver: Ludvig 
Persson Lundgren. Mintage: 625. With a paltry mintage that does not surpass the four figure benchmark, any 
example of an 1838 4 Ducats should be treasured, especially one in a near-Gem grade. The surfaces are aglow 
with luster, and the fields are nicely reflective in contrast to the lightly frosted devices.
€12,000-€15,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 372 ==========

Page 348 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Softly Brilliant Double Ducat with Near-Choice Preservation
1277
SWEDEN. 2 Ducats, 1839. Stockholm Mint. Karl XIV Johan. NGC MS-62. Fr-86; KM-629; SM-
10(10); SG-10; Hagander-592; Bruun-13393. Weight: 6.97 gms. Mintmaster: Alexander Grandinson (AG). 
Engraver: Ludvig Persson Lundgren. Mintage: 2,200. A gleaming golden Double Ducat, this offering displays 
commendable quality in the details, with a rich luster evident. Some handling accounts for the grade assigned, 
though the noted markings in the fields do not diminish too much from the overall eye appeal of the piece. 
€8,000-€10,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 373 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 349
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Beautiful Premium Gem Ducat with Mirrored Fields
1278
SWEDEN. Ducat, 1843. Stockholm Mint. Karl XIV Johan. NGC MS-66. Fr-87; KM-628a; SM-38(38); SG-
42; Hagander-621; Bruun auction-2193; Bruun-13422. Weight: 3.49 gms. Mintmaster: Alexander Grandinson 
(AG). Engraver: Ludvig Persson Lundgren. Bewitching with its tremendous luster and allure, this premium 
Gem glitters with a prooflike appeal that is evident from the deeply mirrored fields and frosty rich devices. 
Stray marks are even hard to locate on the surfaces, with any imperfection being of the smallest caliber. 
Radiant and engrossing in a manner that offers the collector much enticement.
€1,800-€2,200
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 374 ==========

Page 350 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Alluring Prooflike 4 Ducats with Charming Appearance
1279
SWEDEN. 4 Ducats, 1846. Stockholm Mint. Oscar I. NGC MS-62 Prooflike.  Fr-88; KM-670; SM-1(1); 
SG-1; Hagander-656; Bruun auction-2253; Bruun-13444. Weight: 13.94 gms. Mintmaster: Alexander 
Grandinson (AG). Engraver: Ludvig Persson Lundgren. Mintage: 400. A brilliant example that is clearly 
special in manufacture, this 4 Ducats delivers all the features one might expect for such a format with double 
striking of the details and a refined finish that is distinguished from regular strikes. A touch of weakness is 
seen on the lowest peripheries, perhaps arising from die degradation. The bright reflective surfaces do display 
some evidence of handling, with this accounting for the overall technical grade; though given its status as a 
distinguished and uncommon representative, it really has no peer. 
€10,000-€15,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 375 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 351
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Boldly Struck 1850 2 Ducats with Near-Gem Allure
Just 819 Pieces Struck
1280
SWEDEN. 2 Ducats, 1850. Stockholm Mint. Oscar I. NGC MS-64+. Fr-89; KM-680; SM-4(4); SG-4; 
Hagander-658; Bruun auction-2255; Bruun-13473. Weight: 7.00 gms. Mintmaster: Alexander Grandinson 
(AG). Engraver: Ludvig Persson Lundgren. VERY RARE with a mintage of 819. The 5 in the date appears 
to be overstruck, possibly on a 6. Delivering a grandiose and vivid allure resultant from bright luster that 
gleams and glows when held in the light. Soft frost is seen across the devices, providing a nearly prooflike 
appearance. Surfaces are essentially free of marks, falling just short of a Gem grade, as evidenced by the “+” 
grade modifier. 
€15,000-€25,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 376 ==========

Page 352 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Mesmerizing Superb-Gem Ducat with
Alluring Eye Appeal and Star Qualifier
1281
SWEDEN. Ducat, 1853. Stockholm Mint. Oscar I. NGC MS-67★ . Fr-90A; KM-668; SM-17(17); SG-18; 
Hagander-671; Bruun-13504. Weight: 3.48 gms. Mintmaster: Alexander Grandinson (AG). Engraver: Ludvig 
Persson Lundgren. Topping the NGC population report at the lofty Superb Gem level, this exceptional Ducat 
gleams with a bright goldenrod color. Nearly prooflike with much frost on the devices, and displaying a sharp 
eye appeal that is premium for the grade, as confirmed by NGC’s “star” designation.
€3,000-€6,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 377 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 353
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Beautiful Superb-Gem Ducat With Most Beautiful Luster
The Only MS-67 Certified for the Type
1282
SWEDEN. Ducat, 1863. Stockholm Mint. Karl XV . NGC MS-67.  Fr-91; KM-709; SM-4(4); SG-8; 
Hagander-703; Bruun-13575. Weight: 3.47 gms. Mintmaster: Sebastian Tham (ST). Engraver: Lea Ahlborn 
(LA). Immediately eye grabbing with a state of technical preservation far exceeding what one would expect for 
the type, this Ducat glows with luster that is uncommon to say the least. Even under magnification attempting 
to find faults or problems is a difficult task, with essentially nothing to be found on this fresh exemplar.
€2,000-€4,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 378 ==========

Page 354 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Charming Gem Mint State 4 Riksdaler
1283
SWEDEN. 4 Riksdaler, 1867. Stockholm Mint. Karl XV . NGC MS-65.  KM-711; Dav-356; SM-20(20); 
Delzanno-9; Hagander-727; Bruun-13604. Weight: 34.00 gms. Edge lettering: 75/100 DELAR FINSILFVER 
(75/100 parts fine silver). Mintmaster: Sebastian Tham (ST).  Engraver: Lea Ahlborn (LA). Closed “S” 
variety. Softly glowing with a glossy appearance, this Gem is phenomenally detailed with a clarity in the fine 
details that is commendable. Mostly steely gray with the occasional punctuations of deep tone, this hefty and 
premium piece certainly does not lack for appeal.
€2,000-€4,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).


========== PAGE 379 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 355
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
10 Francs That is a Mere Two Points Short of Perfect
1284
SWEDEN. 10 Francs (Carolin), 1869. Stockholm Mint. Karl XV . NGC MS-68. Fr-92; KM-716; SM-11(11); 
SG-26; Hagander-714; Bruun auction-2324; Bruun-13615. Weight: 3.22 gms. Mintmaster: Sebastian Tham. 
Engraver: Lea Ahlborn (LA). Brushing right up against the fine edge of perfection, it barely warrants a 
mention that this piece is the finest certified by NGC. Going far beyond even Mint State qualifiers, this 10 
Francs is perhaps best summarized as the physical representation of the idealized design the engraver must 
have had in mind. The fine details in the orb and on the portrait are executed with an elegance and artistry 
befitting the best works in museums. A specimen that should be intensely pursued, as one is unlikely to see 
another even approaching this lofty one.
€3,000-€6,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 380 ==========

Page 356 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
The L.  E. Bruun Co llection • A Corpus of Scandinavian Monetary History
Incredible Proof 1878 2 Kronor with Rich Color
1285
SWEDEN. 2 Kronor, 1878. Stockholm Mint. Oscar II. NGC PROOF-66 Cameo.  KM-749; SM-47(47); 
Delzanno-13. Bruun-13675. Weight: 15.03 gms. Mintmaster: Emil Brusewitz (EB). Engraver: Lea Ahlborn 
(LA). This “OCH” variant is by far the RAREST in the series and demanded in any grade, much less an almost 
breathtakingly unbelievable Proof-66 Cameo level. There can be no doubt about the proof nature of the strike, 
with razor sharp details and rims that are squared off at an impressive height. Entrancing and kaleidoscopic 
color coats the surfaces, with a rich variegation of sapphire, emerald, ruby, and peridot revealing themselves 
at different points across the surfaces. The cameo contrast is demonstrated in the form of light frost on the 
devices that provide a contrast against the watery fields. In a collection full of wonders, this lot can boast an 
appeal that distinguishes it from nearly all others.
€6,000-€9,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).

========== PAGE 381 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 357
Part I • Saturday , September 14, 2024 • 2:00  PM CEST / 5:00  AM PT
Glorious and Rare Proof with Stunning Kaleidoscopic Color
1286
SWEDEN. 2 Kronor, 1912. Stockholm Mint. Gustav V . NGC PROOF-66 Cameo.  KM-787; SM-5(5); 
Delzanno-4; Bruun-13789. Weight: 14.98 gms. Mintmaster: Karl-August Wallroth (W). Engraver: Adolf 
Lindberg. The RAREST date of the series, which was struck from 1910 to 1940, is taken to a whole different 
level when encountered in Proof format. The details and rims have the sharpness of a fresh razor, with a 
handsome frost topping the details and legends providing good contrast to the reflectivity in the fields. Nearly 
the entirety of the surfaces are dappled with toning, which shows up perhaps more forcefully in the open 
areas. Among the most beautiful coins to ever originate from Sweden, and a once in a lifetime opportunity to 
acquire such a beautiful proof.
€1,000-€2,000
From the L. E. Bruun Collection.
Ex: Countship of Brahesminde Collection (Private Sale - 1922).
End of Auction

========== PAGE 382 ==========

BIDDING INCREMENTS
Page 358 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
Bid  B id Increment
 €0-€499    €20.00 
 €500-€999    €50.00 
 €1,000-€1,999    €100.00 
 €2,000-€4,999    €200.00 
 €5,000-€9,999    €500.00 
 €10,000-€19,999    €1,000.00 
 €20,000-€49,999    €2,000.00 
 €50,000-€99,999    €5,000.00 
 €100,000-€199,999    €10,000.00 
 €200,000-€499,999    €20,000.00 
 €500,000-€1,999,999    €50,000.00 
 €2,000,000-€9,999,999    €100,000.00 
 €10,000,000+  €200,000.00

========== PAGE 383 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 359
Appelgren – T. G. Appelgren. Gustav Vasas Mynt. Stockholm. 1933.
Beskrivelsen 1791 – Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters. Beskrivelse over Danske Mynter og Medailler I  
 d en Kongelige Samling . Copenhagen. 1791.
Bruun – Schou, Lynge, Galster. L. E. Bruuns mønt-og medaillesamling. Copenhagen. 1928.
Bruun auction – Adolf Hess Nachfolger. Sammlung des Herrn L. E. Bruun in Kopenhagen, Schwedische Münzen. 1-2.  
 F rankfurt am Main. 1914.
Dav – John S. Davenport. European Crowns and Talers since 1800. London. 1964.
Dav – John S. Davenport. European Crowns 1700-1800. Galesburg, IL. 1971.
Dav – John S. Davenport. European Crowns 1600-1700. Galesburg, IL. 1974.
Dav – John S. Davenport. European Crowns 1484-1600. Frankfurt am Main. 1977.
Dav-LS – Davenport and Søndergaard. Large Size Silver Coins of the World. Galesburg, IL. 1972.
Delzanno – Roberto Delzanno. Sveriges Myntbok 1 and 2. Stockholm. 2020.
FP – Frank Pedersen. Christian den VII’s mønter 1766-1808/1812. Copenhagen. 2017.
Fr – Arthur and Ira S. Friedberg. Gold Coins of the World. Williston, VT. 2024.
Galster – Georg Galster. Unionstidens udmøntninger. Copenhagen. 1972.
Hagander – Lagerquist, Hirsch, Nordlind. Samling Julius Hagander. Stockholm. 1996.
Harck – Anders Harck. Haderslevmønterne 1591-1593, in Numismatisk Rapport 109. Copenhagen. 2011.
Harck – Anders Harck. Christian IV’s mønter, online catalogue: https://sites.google.com/view/cxhyrz-4.
Hede – Holger Hede. Danmarks og Norges mønter 1541-1814-1977. Copenhagen. 1977.
Hildebrand – Bror Emil Hildebrand. Sveriges och Svenska Konungahusets Minnespenningar. Stockholm. 1874-1875.
Jensen & Skjoldager – Niels Jørgen Jensen & Mogens Skjoldager. Tronraneren - Frederik 1.s danske mønter.  
 C openhagen. 2020.
JS – Jørgen Sømod. Danske og norske medailler og jetoner. Copenhagen. 2006.
KM – Krause / Mishler. World Coins 1601-1700, 1701-1800, 1801-1900, 1901-2000. Wisconsin. var.
Kold – Karsten Kold. Anton Meybusch kongelig hofmedaillør Stockholm Paris København. Copenhagen. 2020.
Kop – Edmund Kopicki. Ilustrowany skorowidz pieniedzy polskich i z Polska związanych. Warzaw. 1995.
Lange – Christian Lange. Sammlung schleswig-holsteiner Münzen und Medaillen I-II. Berlin. 1908-1912.
NM – Ahlström, Brekke, Hemmingson. Norges Mynter. Stockholm. 1976.
NMD – Gunnar Thesen. Norges mynter i dansketiden 1449-1814. Oslo. 2015.
Rønning – Bjørn Rønning. Norges Mynter 1628-1873. Oslo. 1971.
Salvesen – Harald Salvesen. The Harald Salvesen Collection of Trade Dollars and Trade Coinage of the World.  
 Z ürich (Spink). 1988.
SB – Ahlström, Almer, Jonsson. Sveriges Besittnungsmynt / Coins of the Swedish Possessions. Stockholm. 1980.
Schive – Claudius Jacob Schive. Norges Mynter i Middelalderen. Christiania (Oslo). 1865.
Schou – Hans Henrik Schou. Beskrivelse af danske og dorske Mønter 1448-1814 og danske Mønter 1815-1923.  
 C openhagen. 1926.
SG – Roberto Delzanno. Sveriges Guldmynt 1512-2020. Stockholm. 2019.
Sieg – Jan Bendix. Siegs møntkatalog Norden 2018. Copenhagen. 2017.
Skaare – Kolbjørn Skaare. Norges mynthistorie. Oslo. 1995.
(SM) – Ahlström, Almer, Hemmingsson. Sveriges Mynt 1521-1977. Stockholm. 1976.
SM – Carlberg, Hemmingson, Wijk. Sveriges Mynt 1521-2021. Stockholm. 2022.
Aagaard – Sven Aagaard. Frederik III Kronemønt København 1651-1670. Copenhagen. 2004.
Aagaard – Sven Aagaard. Frederik III Guldmønt og Speciemønt 1648-1670. Copenhagen. 2011.
Aagaard – Sven Aagaard et al. Christian V kronemønt speciedalere og dukater Glückstadt 1671-1696.  
 C openhagen. 2022.
Aagaard – Sven Aagaard. Christian IV’s mønter fra Wolfenbüttel 1627, in: Nordisk Numismatisk  Unions  
 M edlemsblad 2.  Copenhagen. 2016.
Aagaard – Sven Aagaard. Beskrivelse af Christian IV’s hebræermønter 1644-1648, in: Numismatisk Rapport 62.  
 C openhagen. 1999.
WORKS CITED

========== PAGE 384 ==========

Page 360 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
Dr. Antoine-Feill
• German Lawyer and patron
• Auction 
• Joseph Hamburger
• Frankfurt am Main
• November 7, 1907
Frederik Christian Bech
• Danish county judge, officer,  
advisor to the King
• Auction
• Sagførernes Auktioner 
• Copenhagen
• December 10, 1906; May 29, 1907
Alfred Benzon
• Danish apothecary, inventor and  
industrialist
• Auction
• Superior Court lawyer H. A. Jacobi
• Copenhagen
• November 6, 1885; May 17, 1886; 
November 29, 1886; May 9, 1887; 
April 30, 1888
Vilhelm Bergsøe
• Danish author, doctorate, artist,  
co-founder of the Danish  
Numismatic Society
• Auction
• Superior Court lawyer H. A. Jacobi
• Copenhagen
• May 5, 1890
B. Biermann
• Norwegian proprietor
• Auction
• W . C. Fabitius (Printer)
• Christiania (Oslo)
• April 26, 1853
Countship of Brahesminde
• The Danish noble family  
Bille-Brahe’s collection of coins  
and medals begun around 1800 
and sold en bloc to L. E. Bruun
• Private purchase
• 1922
Axel Abraham Fröling
• Swedish accountant
• Auction
• Stockholm
• June 13, November 11, 1857
Hans Henrik Frost
• Danish inspector and member of 
the supreme court
• Auction
• C. F . Schubart (Printer)
• Copenhagen
• March 5, 1827; Jan 21, 1828
Jens Peter Børhildus Grimsgaard
• Norwegian lawyer
• Auction
• Superior Court lawyer H. A. Jacobi
• Copenhagen 
• December 05, 1889
Johan Goldschmidt Guildal
• Danish factory owner and co-
founder of the Danish Numismatic 
Society. His collection was pub-
lished by the Society in 1920 and 
the numbers listed in the pedigree 
listed utilize these numbers
• Private purchase
• 1918
Peter Christian Hauberg
• Danish numismatist, scholar and  
author of many of important works  
on Scandinavian coins; director of  
the Royal Danish Coins and Medals  
collection 1898-1920 and a  
founding member of the Danish  
Numismatic Society
• Auction
• Superior Court lawyer H. A. Jacobi
• Copenhagen
• October 10, 1881; March 27, 1882; 
May 5, 1884; April 9, 1885
Peter von Hemmert (Hemert)
• Danish merchant
• Auction
• J.F . Schultz (Printer) 
• Copenhagen
• February 10, 1807
Henrik Hielmstierne
• Danish-Icelandic historian, Privy 
Councellor to king Christian VII, 
collection published 1786 and in 
1812 purchased en bloc by king 
Frederik VI, who traded many of 
the duplicates with Bille-Brahe
• Private purchase
• After 1812
C. P . Humble
• Swedish military chief accountant
• Auction
• Stockholm
• June 5, 1852
Carl Thorvald Jørgensen
• Danish Major-General, veteran of 
the first Schleswig War 1848-1851, 
and author of the first general 
catalogue of Danish coins (1888) 
since the “Beskrivelsen” of 1791. 
His collection was purchased en 
bloc by Guildal
• Private purchase
• 1901
Julius Gustav Berger Klemp
• Danish civil servant and Honourary 
Councillor of State - most of his  
collection came from the estate of 
king Frederik VII (1848-1963)
• Auction
• Christian Hee
• Copenhagen  
• May 14, 1891
August K. Krautwald
• Copenhagen coin dealer
• Private purchase
• Copenhagen
• 1916
Christoph Daniel von Kreber
• Danish Major-General
• Auction
• J. H. Schultz (Printer)
• Copenhagen
• July 20, 1841
Christiane Lugge, née Holst
• Danish spouse of honourary  
Councillor of State Enevold Lugge
• Auction
• C.F . Schubart (Printer)
• Copenhagen
• April 13, 1818
Herman Henrik Julius Lynge
• Danish chancery member and 
• antiquarian bookseller
• Auction
• Lawyer J. Jørgensen
• Copenhagen
• April 15, 20; September 12, 18, 1899
LIST OF IMPORTANT AUCTIONS AND PRIV ATE PURCHASES
The list below includes the following information, when known: the name of the collector: a short biographical 
note; whether the collection was sold at auction or via private sale; the name of auction house, auctioneer, legal 
representative, or printer; the city in which the sale occurred; and the date of sale.

========== PAGE 385 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 361
H. M. Mayntzhusen
• Hamburg merchant. His collection 
was bought en bloc by the Royal 
Danish Coins and Medals  
Collection and the duplicates  
sold at public auction.
• Auction
• Superior Court lawyer H. A. Jacobi
• Copenhagen
• May 26, 1883
Leon Mikocki
• Galician (Poland/Ukraine)  
nobleman and notary
• Auction
• J. Bermann & Sohn
• Vienna
• April 1, 1850
August Christian Mohr
• Norwegian commisary, merchant 
and consul to Naples/Napoli in 
Bergen
• Auction
• Bianco Luno (Printer)
• Copenhagen
• October 4 (or 11), 1847
L. Christian Nielsen
• Copenhagen silk merchant
• Auction
• Thiele (Printer)
• Copenhagen
• November 25, 1878
Peder Pedersen
• Danish astronomer and professor
• Private purchase
• Unknown, died in 1861
Johan Scharp
• Swedish merchant
• Auction
• Stockholm
• 1851, 1853
Carl Frederik Schubart
• Danish printer
• Auction
• Det kongelige Vaisenhuus (Printer)
• Copenhagen
• October 3, 1831  
(erroneously 1851 in 1928  
Bruun catalogue)
Karl Gustav Ritter von  
Schulthess-Rechberg
• Swiss/Austrian/German officer  
and nobleman
• Auction
• Erbstein
• Dresden
• June 2, 1868; June 14, 1869
J. Siökrona
• Swedish senior hunting master to 
the court. His collection was bought 
en bloc by the Royal Danish Coins 
and Medals Collection and the 
duplicates sold at auction.
• Auction
• Superior Court lawyer H. A. Jacobi
• Copenhagen
• May 26, 1883
Lorenz Spengler
• Swiss-Danish artist, keeper of the 
Royal Collections and art teacher to 
kings Christian VI and Frederik V .
• Auction
• J.F . Schultz (Printer)
• Copenhagen
• April 25, 1808
Peter Frederik Suhm
• Danish historian and a pioneer in 
English translation
• Auction
• J.F . Schultz (Printer)
• Copenhagen
• August 18, 1800; March 15, 1802.
Ove Theodor Thomsen
• Danish Bank accountant
• Auction
• Superior Court lawyer H. A. Jacobi
• Copenhagen
• October 1, 1880
Christian Jürgensen Thomsen
• Famed Danish antiquarian,  
inventor of the archaeological 
three-period system and noted 
numismatist
• Auction
• Partially Superior Court lawyer  
H. A. Jacobi
• Copenhagen
• May 6, 1867; May 14, 1868;  
May 24, 1869; May 8, 1871;  
September 22, 1876
Georg Friderich Timm
• Danish court smith
• Auction
• J. H. Schultz (Printer)
• Copenhagen
• July 18, 1831; September 10, 1832; 
October 27, 1834
Johan Andreas Ferdinand Wolff 
(Wulff)
• Danish consul in Manila and bank 
director in Copenhagen. His  
collection was bought en bloc by  
P . Hauberg and the duplicates sold 
at his auction in 1882.
• Auction
• Superior Court lawyer H. A. Jacobi
• Copenhagen
• March 27, 1882
LIST OF IMPORTANT AUCTIONS AND PRIV ATE PURCHASES

========== PAGE 386 ==========

Page 362 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SALE
1. Auction Basics
This is a public auction sale (“ Auction Sale”) conducted by 
auctioneer, Stack’s Bowers Galleries (hereinafter referred 
to as “ Auctioneer” and at times as “Stack’s Bowers”). Bid-
ding in this Auction Sale constitutes acceptance by you 
(“Bidder”) of all the Terms and Conditions of Sale stated 
herein (the “Terms of Sale”). Bidders may include con-
signors who may bid and purchase lots in the Auction 
Sale consigned by the consignor pursuant to their con -
signment agreement with Stack’s Bowers (“Consignor” or 
“Consignors”). A Consignor that bids on their own lots in 
the Auction Sale may pay a different fee than the Buyer’s 
Premium charged to all other Buyers. Stack’s Bowers re-
serves the right to include in any auction sale its own ma-
terial as well as material from affiliated or related compa-
nies, principals, officers or employees. Stack’s Bowers may 
have direct or indirect interests in any of the lots in the 
auction and may collect commissions. THE TWO PRE -
CEDING SENTENCES SHALL BE DEEMED A PART 
OF THE DESCRIPTION OF ALL LOTS CONTAINED 
IN THE CATALOG. Where the Consignor has repur -
chased a lot and the lot is either returned to the Consign-
or or otherwise dealt with or disposed of in accordance 
with the Consignor’s direction, or pursuant to contractual 
agreement, Stack’s Bowers reserves the right to so note in 
the prices realized or to omit a price from the prices real-
ized. Lots may carry a reserve (“Reserve”). A Reserve is 
a price or bid below which the Auctioneer will not sell 
an item or will repurchase an item on behalf of the Con -
signor or for Stack’s Bowers. Reserves may be confidential 
and not disclosed. The Buyer is the Bidder who makes the 
highest bid accepted by the Auctioneer, and includes the 
principal of any Bidder acting as an agent. Auctioneer re-
serves the right to cancel or postpone the Auction Sale 
or any session thereof for any reason whatsoever, and no 
Bidder shall have any claim as a result of any such cancel-
lation or postponement.
2. Descriptions and Grading
Bidder acknowledges that grading of most coins, cur -
rency and cryptocurrency tokens in this Auction Sale 
have been determined by independent grading services, 
and those that are not graded by an independent grad -
ing service may be graded by Stack’s Bowers. Grading of 
rare coins, currency and cryptocurrency tokens is subjec-
tive and, even though grading has a material effect on the 
value of the coins, currency and cryptocurrency tokens, 
grading may differ among independent grading services 
and among numismatists. Stack’s Bowers is not respon -
sible for the grades assigned by independent grading ser-
vices, and makes no warranty or representation regarding 
such grades. Bidder further acknowledges and agrees that 
grades assigned by Stack’s Bowers and lot descriptions 
are based solely upon an examination of the coins, cur -
rency and cryptocurrency tokens and are intended solely 
to identify coins, currency and cryptocurrency and note 
any perceived characteristics. However, coin grading and 
descriptions by Stack’s Bowers are subjective. Stack’s Bow-
ers does not warrant the accuracy of such grading or de -
scriptions, nor do they in any way form the basis for any 
bid. Unless noted, all photographs in this catalog are of 
the actual items being sold but may not be the actual size 
or scale.
3. The Bidding Process
The Auctioneer shall have the right to open or accept bid-
ding on any lot by placing a bid on behalf of: the Con -
signor or his or her agent; a mail, telephone, Internet or 
telefax Bidder; or any other participant in the Auction 
Sale. Bids must be for an entire lot and each lot consti -
tutes a separate sale. All bids must be on an increment or 
half increment  (a cut bid) as established by the Auction-
eer. Non-conforming bids will be rounded down to the 
nearest half or full increment and this rounded bid will 
be the Bidder’s high bid. No lot will be broken up unless 
otherwise permitted by the Auctioneer. Lots will be sold 
in their numbered sequence unless Auctioneer directs 
otherwise. All material shall be sold in separate lots to 
the highest Bidder as determined by the Auctioneer. Auc-
tioneer shall have the right in its sole and absolute discre-
tion to accept or decline any bid, establish bid increments, 
challenge any bid or bidding increment, to reduce any 
mail bid received, adjudicate all bidding disputes, to ex -
clude any Bidder and to determine the prevailing bid. The 
Auctioneer shall have the right, but not the obligation, to 
rescind the acceptance of any bid and place the lot(s) for 
Auction Sale again. Auctioneer’s decision on all bidding 
disputes shall be binding and final. For Bidder’s protec -
tion, no “unlimited” or “buy” bids will be accepted. When 
identical bids are received for a lot, preference is given to 
the first bid received as determined by the Auctioneer. For 
example, a mail bid will take precedence over an identical 
floor bid or live internet bid. Cut bids are only accepted on 
bids greater than €500 and each Bidder may only execute 
one cut bid per lot. All bids are final and cannot be can -
celled or withdrawn without the express consent of the 
Auctioneer, in its sole discretion. Bids will not be accepted 
from persons under eighteen (18) years of age without a 
parent’s written consent which acknowledges the Terms 
of Sale herein and agrees to be bound thereby on behalf of 
the underage Bidder. The Auction Sale is complete when 
the Auctioneer so announces by the fall of the hammer or 
in any other customary manner.
THIS IS NOT AN APPROV AL SALE. Except as oth -
erwise expressly provided in these Terms of Sale, NO 
PURCHASED ITEMS MAY BE RETURNED FOR ANY 
REASON. All prospective Bidders who examine the lot(s) 
prior to the Auction Sale personally assume all respon -
sibility for any damage that Bidder causes to the lot(s). 
Stack’s Bowers shall have sole reasonable discretion in 
determining the value of the damage caused by a Bidder, 
which shall be promptly paid by such Bidder.
STACK’S BOWERS IS NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR ANY 
ERRORS IN BIDDING. All Bidders should make certain 
to bid on the correct lot and that the bid is the bid intend-
ed. Once the hammer has fallen and the Auctioneer has 
announced the Buyer, the Buyer is unconditionally bound 
to pay for the lot, even if the Buyer made a mistake. Stack’s 
Bowers reserves the right to withdraw any lot at any time. 
No participant in the Auction Sale shall have a right to 
claim any damages, including consequential damages if a 
lot is withdrawn, even if the withdrawal occurs after the 
Auction Sale.

========== PAGE 387 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 363
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SALE
4. Bidder Registration Required
All persons seeking to bid must complete and sign a reg -
istration card either at the auction or online, or otherwise 
qualify to bid, as determined in the sole discretion of the 
Auctioneer. By submitting a bid, the Bidder acknowledges 
that Bidder has read the Terms of Sale, the descriptions 
for the lot(s) on which they have bid, and that they agree 
to be bound by these Terms of Sale. The Bidder acknowl-
edges that the invoice describing a lot by number incor -
porates the catalog and Terms of Sale. Person appearing 
on the U.S.A. ’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (“OFAC”) 
list, or any comparable list issued by the country hosting 
the auction are not eligible to bid.
5. Buyer’s Premiums and Value Added Tax (V AT)
For Buyers who take delivery of lots in non-EU coun-
tries, a premium of twenty percent (20%) based upon the 
total amount of the hammer (minimum of €25), will be 
added to all purchases of individual lots (the “Buyer’s Pre-
mium”). Danish V AT will not apply, provided that the lots 
in question are exported outside of the EU within 30 days 
from the date of the Auction Sale. 
Buyers being non-V AT registered entities or individuals 
who take delivery of lots within EU countries subject to 
margin scheme taxation (in Danish “brugtmoms”) will be 
invoiced a V AT charge and a Buyer’s Premium for a total 
of twenty five percent (25%) based upon the total amount 
of the hammer (minimum of €25), which will be added 
to all purchases of individual lots. For Buyers who take 
delivery of lots within EU countries which are either V AT-
exempt or subject to regular V AT, a Buyer’s Premium of 
twenty percent (20%) based upon the total amount of the 
hammer (minimum of €25), will be added (excluding 
Danish V AT on the hammer plus Buyer’s premium). Lots 
subject to regular V AT will be marked on the website and 
in the catalog with the symbol “u” or with the text “This 
item is subject to full V AT” .
Institutional EU Buyers with a valid V AT number regis-
tered in an EU member state (other than Denmark) will 
be charged a Buyer’s Premium, but may be exempt from 
Danish V AT if said EU Buyer provides the requisite statu-
tory registration documents and can provide documenta-
tion that the lot has been transported to the foreign ad -
dress (i.e. outside Denmark) provided by the EU Buyer 
to the Auctioneer. These documents comprise the V AT 
registration number and the acknowledgement of receipt 
from the territory of the EU member state in which the 
V AT registration was issued. Should the Auctioneer effect 
the export of any lots, and provided a valid V AT registra-
tion document was submitted to the Auctioneer before 
purchase, V AT will not be charged.
Buyer’s Premiums as described above will be applied re -
gardless of affiliation with any group or organization.  A 
reacquisition charge may apply to Consignors pursuant to 
a separate agreement, which may be higher or lower than 
the Buyer’s Premium.
Any import (and/or turnover) tax and duty payable 
abroad is on Buyer’s account in every case. 
6. Payment
Payment is due immediately upon the fall of the Auction-
eer’s hammer. Payment is delinquent and in default if not 
received in full, in good funds, within fourteen (14) calen-
dar days of the Auction Sale (the “Default Date”), without 
exception, time being of the essence. All invoices will be 
made in Euros. Unless otherwise agreed in writing prior 
to the Auction Sale, all auction sales are payable strictly in 
U.S. Dollars or Euros. If payment is made in U.S Dollars, 
Buyer’s invoices will be credited with the amount of Euros 
at the currency exchange rate established by the Auction-
eer on the date of the  of the Auction Sale. Provided, this 
exchange rate is only valid for payments made on the date 
of the Auction Sale and will thereafter fluctuate. Payments 
made in U.S. Dollars after the date of the Auction Sale 
will be credited with the lower of the currency exchange 
rate on the payment date or the date of the Auction Sale. 
Buyer will be responsible for payment of any shortfall 
upon receipt of notice from the Auctioneer of such short-
fall amount. Payments may be made by U.S. Dollars or 
Euros, checks from U.S. banks, wire transfer or cashier’s 
check. Cash transactions will not be accepted. Contact the 
Auctioneer for wiring instructions before sending a wire. 
Wire transfers from banks located outside of the United 
States are subject to an international bank wire fee of €35. 
Payment by ACH/eCheck will be accepted upon prior 
approval by Auctioneer. Payment by credit card (Visa, 
Mastercard, American Express and Discover) or Paypal 
will be accepted upon prior approval by Auctioneer. All 
payments by credit card or Paypal will incur a surcharge 
of 2.5%. This fee only applies to credit card or Paypal 
transactions, and does not exceed Auctioneer’s cost of 
processing these payments. Payment by check, ACH/
eCheck, wire transfer or cashier’s check will not incur this 
surcharge. All payments are subject to a clearing period 
determined by the Auctioneer. Stack’s Bowers reserves the 
right not to release lots for which good funds have not yet 
been received in full. On any past due accounts, Stack’s 
Bowers reserves the right, without notice, to extend credit 
and impose carrying charges (as described below). Buyers 
agree to pay reasonable attorney’s fees and costs incurred 
to collect past due accounts as permitted under applicable 
law. Any invoice not paid by the Default Date will bear 
interest at the highest permissible in accordance with 
applicable law.  . Buyers personally and unconditionally 
guarantee payment in full of all amounts owed to Stack’s 
Bowers. Any person by submitting bids on behalf of a cor-
poration or other entity, by making such bid, agrees to be 
personally jointly and severally liable for the payment of 
the purchase price and any related charges and the perfor-
mance of all Buyer obligations under these Terms of Sale 
and Stack’s Bowers reserves the right to require a written 
guarantee of such payments and obligations. Bidders who 
have not established credit with Stack’s Bowers must fur-
nish satisfactory information and credit references and/
or deposit at least twenty-five percent (25%) of their total 
bids for that Auction Sale session(s) or such other amount 
as Stack’s Bowers may, in its sole and absolute discretion 
require before any bids from such Bidder will be accepted. 
Deposits submitted will be applied to purchases. Any re -
maining deposits will be promptly refunded, upon clear -
ance of funds.

========== PAGE 388 ==========

Page 364 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SALE
7.  Sales Tax
United States Buyers will be charged all applicable sales 
tax unless a valid Resale Certificate has been provided to 
the Auctioneer prior to the auction. Should state sales tax 
become applicable in the delivery state prior to delivery 
of the property on the invoice, the United States Buyers 
agree to pay all applicable state sales tax as required by 
the delivery state as of the shipping date. In the event any 
applicable sales tax is not paid by a United States Buyer 
that should have been paid, even if not such tax was not 
charged or collected by Stack’s Bowers by mistake, error, 
negligence or gross negligence, a United States Buyer 
nonetheless acknowledges responsibility to pay such sales 
tax and remains fully liable for and agrees to promptly 
pay such taxes on demand, together with any interest or 
penalty that may be assessed by the taxing authority and 
agrees to indemnify and hold Auctioneer harmless from 
any applicable sales tax, interest or penalties due. Lots 
from different Auctions may not be aggregated for sales 
tax purposes.
8.  Financial Responsibility
In the event any applicable conditions of these Terms of 
Sale herein are not complied with by a Buyer or if the 
Buyer fails to make payment in full by the Default Date, 
Stack’s Bowers reserves the right, in its sole discretion, in 
addition to all other remedies which it may have at law or 
in equity to rescind the sale of that lot or any other lot or 
lots sold to the defaulting Buyer, retaining all payments 
made by Buyer as liquidated damages, it being recognized 
that actual damages may be speculative or difficult to 
compute, and upon prior notice to Buyer resell a portion 
or all of the lots held by Stack’s Bowers, in a commercially 
reasonable manner, which may include a public or private 
sale, in a quantity sufficient in the sole opinion of Stack’s 
Bowers to satisfy the indebtedness, plus all accrued charg-
es, and Stack’s Bowers may charge a seller’s commission 
that is commercially reasonable. More than one such sale 
may take place at the option of Stack’s Bowers. If Stack’s 
Bowers resells the lots, Buyer agrees to pay for the reason-
able cost of such sale,. Notice of the sale shall be by inter-
nationally recognized overnight courier service to the ad-
dress utilized on the Bid Sheet, Auction Consignment and 
Security Agreement or other last known address by Stack’s 
Bowers. The proceeds shall be applied first to the satisfac-
tion of any damages occasioned by Buyer’s breach, then 
to any other indebtedness owed to Stack’s Bowers, includ-
ing without limitation, commissions, handling charges, 
carrying charges, the expenses of both sales, seller’s fees, 
reasonable attorneys’ fees, costs, collection agency fees 
and costs and any other costs or expenses incurred. Buyer 
may also be liable to Stack’s Bowers for any deficiency if 
the proceeds of such sale or sales are insufficient to cover 
such amounts.
Buyer grants to Stack’s Bowers, its affiliates and assign -
ees, the right to offset any sums due, or found to be due 
to Stack’s Bowers, and to make such offset from any any 
sums due to Buyer by Stack’s Bowers, its affiliates and as-
signees. In addition, defaulting Buyers will be deemed to 
have granted to Stack’s Bowers, its affiliates and assignees, 
a security interest in: (x) the purchased lots and their pro-
ceeds, and (y) such sums or other items and their pro -
ceeds, in the possession of Stack’s Bowers, its affiliates or 
assignees, to secure all indebtedness due to Stack’s Bow -
ers and its affiliated companies, plus all accrued expenses, 
carrying charges, seller’s fees, attorney fees, and costs, un-
til the indebtedness is paid in full. A United States Buyer 
grants Stack’s Bowers the right to file a UCC-1 financing 
statement for such items. Non-United States Buyers grant 
to Stack’s Bowers such other form of as may be required 
to perfect or otherwise confirm a security interest therein. 
Stack’s Bowers may assign any such interest to any affili-
ated or related company or any third party deemed appro-
priate by Stack’s Bowers without notice or consent of the 
Buyer. If the auction invoice is not paid for in full by the 
Default Date, a carrying charge of one-and-one-half per-
cent (1-1/2%) per month may be imposed on the unpaid 
amount until it is paid in full. In the event this interest 
rate exceeds the interest permitted by law, the same shall 
be adjusted to the maximum rate permitted by law, and 
any amount paid in excess thereof shall be allocated to 
principal. Where permitted under applicable law, Buyer 
agrees to pay all reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs and 
other collection costs incurred by Stack’s Bowers or any 
affiliated or related company to collect past due invoices 
or to interpret or enforce the terms hereof or in any ac -
tion or proceeding arising out of or related to the Auction 
Sale. Stack’s Bowers reserves the right to assign its interest 
to any third party. To the extent that the Buyer for any 
lot consists of more than one person or entity, each such 
person or entity is jointly and severally liable for all obli -
gations of the Buyer, regardless of the title or capacity of 
such person or entity. With respect to United States Buy-
ers, Stack’s Bowers shall have all the rights of a secured 
creditor under Article 9 of the California Commercial 
Code and with respect to non-United States Buyers such 
other applicable law, and all rights of the consignor to col-
lect amounts due from the Buyer, whether at law or equity.
9.  Shipping
It is the Buyer’s responsibility to contact Stack’s Bowers 
after the sale to make shipping and packaging arrange -
ments. Due to the fragile nature of some lots, Stack’s Bow-
ers may elect not to assume responsibility for shipping or 
packing, or may charge additional shipping and handling. 
Stack’s Bowers, in its sole discretion, may not ship to se -
lect countries. Lots indicated as being “framed” or that are 
specifically identified in the catalog are shipped at Buyer’s 
risk. All taxes, postage, shipping, if applicable, handling, 
insurance costs, the Buyer’s Premium, and any other fees 
required by law to be charged or collected will be added to 
the invoice for any lots invoiced to Buyer. All lots shipped 
to countries outside of the country where the Auction 
is hosted will be billed an additional one-half percent 
(1/2%) for insurance (minimum of €10). For any lots de-
livered outside the country where the auction is hosted, 
the declaration value shall be the item’(s) hammer price 
plus its buyer’s premium. Auctioneer shall not be liable 
for any loss caused or resulting from seizure or destruc -
tion under quarantine or customs regulation or confis -
cation by order of any government or public authority. 
Buyer shall be responsible for paying all applicable taxes, 

========== PAGE 389 ==========

 Bid Online at www.StacksBowers.com P age 365
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SALE
duties and customs charges for all lots delivered outside 
the country where the auction is hosted. All lots will be 
shipped FOB Destination, freight prepaid and charged 
back. Title and risk of loss pass to the Buyer at the destina-
tion upon tender of delivery. Acceptance of delivery con-
stitutes acceptance of the purchased lots. Inspection of the 
purchased lots is not required for acceptance. Any and all 
claims based upon Buyer’s failure to receive a purchased 
lot, Buyer’s receipt of a lot in damaged condition, or oth-
erwise related to delivery, must be received in writing by 
Stack’s Bowers no later than the earlier of thirty (30) days 
after payment, or the date of the Auction Sale (the “Out -
side Claim Date”). As Buyers may not receive notification 
of shipment, it is Buyer’s responsibility to keep track of 
the Outside Claim Date and make timely notification of 
any such claim. The failure to make a timely claim, time 
being of the essence, shall constitute a waiver of any such 
claim. Orders paid by credit card will only be shipped to 
the verified address on file with the credit card merchant.
It shall be the responsibility for Buyer to arrange pick-up 
or shipping in a timely manner (within 10 days). All Lots 
left at our facility or under our control after an Auction 
Sale for more than 60 days will be sent to secure storage 
and incur a storage fee in the amount of €10.00 per item 
per day starting upon our written notice to you and con -
tinuing until the Lots are retrieved. Ninety (90) days af -
ter the date of such notice, if the Lots have not yet been 
retrieved, we may sell the Lots in a commercially rea -
sonable manner, which may include a public or private 
sale, in a quantity sufficient in the opinion of Auctioneer 
to satisfy any unpaid amounts, plus all accrued charges, 
and Auctioneer may charge a seller’s commission that is 
commercially reasonable. More than one such sale may 
take place at the option of Auctioneer. The net proceeds 
of such sale shall then be applied to the satisfaction of any 
unpaid amounts, including the costs of storage and sale 
(including reasonable expenses and attorney’s fee) and 
the excess, if any, will be remitted to you, held for your 
account or disposed of as required by law.
10. DISCLAIMER AND W ARRANTIES
NO W ARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FIT -
NESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE IS MADE OR 
IMPLIED ON ANY LOT. NO W ARRANTY , WHETHER 
EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, IS MADE WITH RESPECT 
TO ANY LOT EXCEPT FOR W ARRANTY OF TITLE 
PROVIDED BY THE CONSIGNOR. AUCTIONEER 
IS SELLING ONLY THAT RIGHT OR TITLE TO THE 
LOT THAT THE CONSIGNOR MAY HAVE AS OF THE 
AUCTION SALE DATE. ALL LOTS ARE SOLD “ AS IS” 
AND WITH ALL FAULTS. PURCHASER HEREBY AS-
SUMES ALL RISKS CONCERNING AND RELATED 
TO THE GRADING, QUALITY , DESCRIPTION, CON-
DITION, AND PROVENANCE OF A LOT.
a. COINS, CURRENCY AND CRYPTOCURRENCY 
TOKENS LISTED IN THIS CATALOG AS GRADED 
AND ENCAPSULATED BY PCGS, NGC, CAC GRAD -
ING, ANACS, ICG, PCGS CURRENCY , PMG, PCGS 
BANKNOTE GRADING, CMC OR ANY OTHER 
THIRD PARTY GRADING SERVICE ARE SOLD “ AS-
IS” EXCEPT AS EXPRESSLY SET FORTH HEREIN 
AND MAY NOT BE RETURNED FOR ANY REASON 
WHATSOEVER BY ANY BUYER. ALL THIRD PARTY 
GRADING SERVICE GUARANTEES, INCLUDING 
AUTHENTICITY , ARE THE SOLE RESPONSIBILITY 
OF THE THIRD PARTY GRADING SERVICE AND 
NOT W ARRANTIES OR GUARANTEES OF THE 
AUCTIONEER. BUYERS SHOULD CONTACT THESE 
THIRD PARTY GRADING SERVICES DIRECTLY 
WITH RESPECT TO ANY CLAIMS OR QUESTIONS 
THEY MAY HAVE CONCERNING THEIR GUARAN -
TEES AND W ARRANTIES. BUYERS ACKNOWLEDGE 
AND AGREE THAT AUCTIONEER IS NOT BOUND 
BY OR LIABLE FOR ANY OPINION OR CERTIFCA -
TION BY ANY THIRD PARTY GRADING SERVICE.
b. In the case of non-certified coins, currency and cryp -
tocurrency tokens that have neither been examined by 
the Buyer prior to the Auction Sale, nor purchased by the 
Buyer or Buyer’s agent at the Auction Sale, if it is deter -
mined in a review by Stack’s Bowers that there is a ma -
terial error in the catalog description of a non-certified 
coin, currency, or cryptocurrency token such lot may be 
returned, provided written notice is received by Stack’s 
Bowers no later than seventy-two (72) hours of delivery 
of the lots in question, and such lots are returned and 
received by Stack’s Bowers, in their original, sealed con -
tainers, no later than fourteen (14) calendar days after de-
livery, in the same condition the lot(s) were delivered to 
the Buyer, time being of the essence. Non-certified coins, 
currency and cryptocurrency tokens that have been either 
examined by the Buyer prior to the Auction Sale or pur -
chased by the Buyer or Buyer’s agent at the Auction Sale, 
are not granted return privileges, except for authenticity 
(unless described and sold as not authentic).
c. All non-certified coins and currency are guaranteed to 
be authentic.
d. All certified and non-certified cryptocurrency tokens 
are guaranteed to be authentic only. Auctioneer disclaims 
any guaranty of any kind with respect to cryptocurrency 
tokens, including, but not limited to: face value, the con -
tents or existence of any accounts, wallets, or other physi-
cal, digital or other receptacles of value, the existence of a 
cryptographic private key, or the ability to fund any cryp-
tocurrency. Actual cryptocurrency value is neither con-
firmed nor guaranteed by Auctioneer.
If an item or items are returned pursuant to the terms 
herein, they must be housed in their original, sealed and 
unopened container.
e. Late remittance or removal of any item from its original 
container or third party graded holder, or altering a coin 
constitutes just cause for revocation of all return privi
-
leges.
f. Grading or condition of rare coins, currency and cryp-
tocurrency tokens may have a material effect on the value 
of the item(s) purchased, and the opinion of others (in -
cluding independent grading services) may differ with the 
independent grading services opinion or interpretation of 
Stack’s Bowers. Stack’s Bowers shall not be bound by any 
prior, or subsequent opinion, determination or certifica -
tion by any independent grading service.

========== PAGE 390 ==========

Page 366 Stack’s Bowers Galleries
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SALE
g. Questions regarding the minting of a coin as a “proof ” 
or as a “business strike” relate to the method of manufac-
ture and not to authenticity.
h. All oral and written statements made by Stack’s Bow -
ers and its employees or agents (including affiliated and 
related companies) are statements of opinion only, and 
are not warranties or representations of any kind, unless 
stated otherwise stated in a specific written warranty, and 
no employee or agent of Stack’s Bowers has authority to 
vary or alter these Terms of Sale. Stack’s Bowers reserves 
the right to vary or alter the Terms of Sale, either generally 
or with respect to specific persons or circumstances, in its 
sole discretion. Any variation or alteration shall be effec -
tive only if in writing and signed by an officer of Stack’s 
Bowers authorized to do so.
i. Stack’s Bowers is acting only as auctioneer. Title to the 
lots purchased passes directly from the Consignor to the 
Buyer. Accordingly, Stack’s Bowers does not make, and 
disclaims, any warranty of title.
j. Bidders shall have no recourse directly against the Con-
signor for any reason whatsoever, except for warranties 
of title.
k. Bidder acknowledges that the numismatic, currency 
and cryptocurrency token market is speculative, unreg -
ulated and volatile, and that prices may rise or fall over 
time. Stack’s Bowers does not guarantee or represent that 
any customer buying for investment purposes will be able 
to sell for a profit in the future.
l. Bidder acknowledges and agrees that neither Stack’s 
Bowers, nor its employees, affiliates, agents, third-party 
providers or consignors warrant that auctions will be 
unimpaired, uninterrupted or error free and accordingly 
shall not be liable for any such events.
11. Waiver and Release
Bidder, for themself, their heirs, agents, successors and 
assignees, generally and specifically waives and releases, 
and forever discharges Stack’s Bowers, and its respective 
affiliates, parents, officers, directors, shareholders, agents, 
subsidiaries, employees, managers and members and 
each of them, and their respective successors and assign-
ees from any and all claims, rights, demands and causes 
of actions and suits, of whatever kind or nature, includ -
ing but not limited to claims based upon Auctioneer’s 
negligence, whether in law or equity, tort or otherwise, 
whether known or unknown, suspected or unsuspected 
(a “Claim”), which Bidder may assert with respect to and/
or arising out of, or in connection with any challenge to 
the authenticity of any lot purchased, the sale itself, any lot 
bid upon or consigned, and/or the auction, except where 
such Claim is otherwise expressly authorized in these 
Terms of Sale or to the extent that the application of such 
waivers and releases is in any way restricted or prohib -
ited by applicable law. It is the intention of Bidder that 
this waiver and release shall be effective as a bar to each 
and every Claim that may arise hereunder or be related to 
the Auction Sale, and Bidder hereby knowingly and vol -
untarily waives any and all rights and benefits otherwise 
conferred upon him or her by the provisions of Section 
1542 of the California Civil Code, which reads in full as 
follows:
“ A GENERAL RELEASE DOES NOT EXTEND TO 
CLAIMS WHICH THE CREDITOR OR RELEASING 
PARTY DOES NOT KNOW OR SUSPECT TO EXIST IN 
HIS OR HER FAVOR AT THE TIME OF EXECUTING 
THE RELEASE, WHICH IF KNOWN BY HIM OR HER 
MUST HAVE MATERIALLY AFFECTED HIS OR HER 
SETTLEMENT WITH THE DEBTOR OR RELEASED 
PA RT Y.”
If a Bidder or Buyer is acting as a consumer, the waiver 
and release in this section 11 shall not apply.
12. Disputes
Any claim, dispute or controversy arising out of or related 
to these Terms of Sale, or the construction, interpretation, 
performance, enforceability of validity of these terms of 
sale, the Auction Sale or any lot (a “Dispute”) shall be de-
termined in accordance with Danish Law and with under 
the jurisdiction of the Danish courts, excluding any Dis -
pute with a Bidder or Buyer residing in the United States, 
in which case the laws of the State of California shall ap -
ply, without regard to its principles of conflict of laws, and 
under the exclusive jurisdiction of the State and Federal 
courts sitting in Orange County, Ca;ifornia. 
13. General Terms
Except as expressly provided herein, these Terms of Sale 
and the Auction Sale shall be construed and enforced 
in accordance with, and governed by Danish law. These 
Terms of Sale and the information on the Stack’s Bowers’ 
website constitute the entire agreement between the par -
ties hereto on the subject matter hereof and supersede all 
other agreements, understandings, warranties and rep -
resentations concerning the subject matter hereof. If any 
section of these Terms of Sale or any term or provision of 
any section is held to be invalid, void, or unenforceable by 
any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining sec -
tions or terms and provisions of a section shall continue 
in full force and effect without being impaired or invali -
dated in any way. Stack’s Bowers may at its sole and ab -
solute discretion, make loans or advances to Consignors 
and/or Bidders.
14. Non-English Translation
The non-English translations are provided as a matter of 
convenience. In the event of a conflict, all English Terms 
of Sale and lot descriptions take precedence and are bind-
ing.
Bidding in this Auction Sale constitutes unconditional ac-
ceptance by the Bidder of the foregoing Terms of Sale.
Please note: Transparent holders in which the auction lots 
are stored are to facilitate viewing and inspection of the 
lots and ARE NOT for long-term storage.
PCGS and NGC numbers provided are for Bidder conve-
nience only, we do not guarantee their accuracy. An in -
correct PCGS or NGC number is not grounds to return 
a lot.
For PRICES REALIZED after the sale, call 1-800-458-
4646. Preliminary prices realized will also be posted on 
the Internet soon after the session closes.

========== PAGE 391 ==========



========== PAGE 392 ==========

STACK’S BOWERS GALLERIES
+011.45.88749409 Copenhagen Office
800.458.4646 California Office  •  800.566.2580 New Y ork Office
infodk@stacksbowers.com • info@stacksbowers.com  •  www.stacksbowers.com
1550 Scenic Avenue, Suite 150, Costa Mesa, CA 92626  •  949.253.0916 
470 Park Avenue, New Y ork, NY 10022  •  212.582.2580
84 State Street (at 22 Merchants Row), Boston, MA 02109 • 617.843.8343
1735 Market Street (18th & JFK Boulevard), Philadelphia, PA 19103 • 267.609.1804
California • New Y ork • Boston • New Hampshire • Oklahoma • Philadelphia • Sacramento • Virginia
Hong Kong • Copenhagen • Paris • Vancouver
